# Unknown Chapter

*Source: Auditory Cognition and Human Performance by C. L. Baldwin (2012)*

---

# 9 **Cross-Modal Influences in Sound and Speech **

## **INTRODUCTION **

The human perceptual system has evolved to integrate information from each of the senses (i.e., vision, audition, somatosensory, olfaction, and gustation). Yet, in everyday life, hearing and seeing tend to be treated as separate, independent entities. When we exercise our visual faculty, as when searching for a friend at a crowded party, we think of this task as purely visual. Similarly, having found the friend, when we strain our ears to hear his or her words in the din of the party, we think we are merely exercising our auditory abilities. Most of us tend to think of the senses as independent. After all, many of us know someone who has lost one or the other sense—a friend or relative who is blind or someone who is deaf. But, among those who have both senses, little thought is given to the influence of one sense on the other. As discussed in this chapter, however, vision, audition, and tactile (touch) abilities can have remarkable influences on each other. The senses are interdependent. Hearing a sound helps us direct visual attention to the spatial location of the sound (Perrott, Cisneros, McKinley, & Dangelo, 1996). A visual stimulus can enhance our ability to interpret auditory information (i.e., understanding speech, judging distance). In fact, the auditory cortex can be activated by silent lipreading— when absolutely no sound is present (see Calvert, Bullmore, Brammer, & Campbell, 1997). This chapter examines a number of such cross-modal interactions (primarily between vision and hearing), as well as issues concerning language processing by eye and ear.

The mental workload of speech processing was discussed at length in Chapter 8 . Is listening to speech more or less effortful than reading text? Are there certain situations or work environments in which one modality would be processed more efficiently than the other? Does visual processing affect our ability to listen, and vice versa, does listening affect our ability to see? How much benefit does one get from visual cues when listening to speech? These are a few of the questions addressed in this chapter.

Before dealing with these issues, the distinction between *input modality *(i.e., auditory vs. visual) and *information code *(i.e., verbal vs. visual or spatial) must be noted. Input modality is rather straightforward. The form the information is received in—whether auditory, visual, olfactory, or tactile—defines the modality in which stimulus information reaches a person. A closely related term is the *channel *of information. Auditory or acoustic information is received through the auditory channel, visual information through the visual channel, and so on.

Defining the information code is less straightforward. Information taken in through the auditory channel may be processed in a verbal, visual, or spatial code, depending on the type of information. Imagine that a friend verbally describes to you a familiar person or object. Most likely, you will form a visual image of the person or item—a visual code for the information. On the other hand, if the verbal description is of a new apartment (how your friend enters and walks through the living room to get to the kitchen and then down a hallway to get to the office), then a spatial code will likely be formed of the information. Finally, if your friend describes to you what he or she means by the word *independence *, you are most likely to form a verbal code to process the information. As Paivio (1969) and others have discussed, it is relatively difficult to form a visual image of abstract words such as “independence”; therefore, such words are thought to remain in a verbal code during short-term memory retention periods.

In the same way, visual information can be coded verbally—as in the case of text—or verbally and then spatially. An example would be a description that you provide of the layout of your apartment in a written letter. Visual information in the form of pictures or patterns may be processed using a visual code. There is currently ongoing debate (see Bernstein, Auer, & Moore, 2004) regarding whether audiovisual (AV) speech information is combined into a common format or code (an amodal linguistic code) or whether AV information retains modality-specific representations that may be linked or associated at higher processing levels. However, regardless of the specific level of the mechanism responsible, cross-modal speech interactions have important implications for human performance in many applied settings. For the purposes of this chapter, a neutral stance is taken regarding the verbal code of processing, leaving a precise definition of the nature of this code to await the outcome of further research. There are also other forms of auditory codes in addition to the verbal one described (i.e., rhythmic, melodic, etc.), but for the present purposes, the focus here is on the dominant codes in the working memory literature: verbal, visual, and spatial (Baddeley, 2003; Deyzac, Logie, & Denis, 2006; Logie, 1986; Shah & Miyake, 1996; Smith & Jonides, 1997). We focus on these codes as they have received considerably more attention in the relevant literature and would seem to have the greatest potential to be involved in cross-modal interaction effects.

Four main topic areas are discussed in this chapter. First, evidence for the distinction between visual and verbal codes is presented, followed by a discussion of important issues pertaining to processing language by eye or by ear (text vs. speech). The third major section deals with cross-modal links, including linguistic, spatial, and multisensory facilitation of response. The fourth and final section discusses dual-task investigations involving tasks presented in auditory and other modalities, focusing on the impact of task modality on either facilitating or disrupting task performance. As discussed in the next section, the existence of both visual and verbal codes in human memory is now well documented, and each code has unique processing characteristics.
## **VERBAL AND VISUAL CODES **

Many researchers have examined how people process information presented through visual and auditory channels (Paivio, 1969; Paivio & Csapo, 1971). Early evidence for a distinction in processing mechanisms between the two presentation formats can be found in the dual-coding theory of Paivio (1969), as well as by Brooks (1968). Further evidence for multiple coding systems was later presented by Santa (1977) and Wickens (1980, 1984) and from the results of numerous studies of dual-task performance, particularly those involving cross-modality interference as discussed in the following material.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, there was controversy over how information (i.e., pictures, words) was stored in long-term memory. Some thought that information of all types was stored in the form of a set of propositions (Pylyshyn, 1973). Evidence for a visual code as an alternative explanation came from research with mental rotation (Shepard & Metzler, 1971) and from Paivio’s demonstrations that material is remembered better if people are able to encode it both visually and verbally (e.g., Paivio, 1969; Paivio & Csapo, 1971). Santa (1977) provided further evidence for a distinction between verbal and visual-spatial processing in an experiment involving the presentation of geometric shapes and visually presented words. Participants viewed an array, which in one condition consisted of three geometric shapes, two objects above and one below ( Figure 9.1 (a)). In a second condition, three words were presented visually, two words above and one below. See an example of the type of stimuli used by Santa in Figure 9.1 . Following presentation of the arrays, participants saw a series of test arrays presented either in the same configuration (two above and one below) ( Figure 9.1 (c)) or linearly (all in the same row) ( Figure 9.1 (d)) and were required to determine if the test arrays consisted of the same elements as the original display regardless of order. Examination of response times for making a determination revealed a clear interaction between the geometric and word conditions and the format of the test array. Participants were faster in making a determination in the geometric condition if the test array preserved the same spatial configuration. However, in the word condition participants were faster when the test arrays presented words in a linear fashion rather than preserving the spatial configuration. These results suggest that the geometric shapes were processed using a visual code, while the words—although presented visually—were processed using a verbal code.

**FIGURE 9.1 **Illustrations of the materials used by Santa (1977) and Zimmer (1998).

Zimmer (1998, Experiment 2) replicated Santa’s (1977) results. In a variation of Santa’s paradigm, Zimmer included trials in which the shapes and words were occasionally intermixed on the same trials (Experiment 1). Participants were slower to respond to incongruent trials in these “mixed” trials just as they had been in the geometric shape trials, suggesting that isolated words may also be coded visually rather than only verbally. Note that so far we have been discussing visual presentation of material that may be coded either visually or verbally. Zimmer showed that in at least some cases text could be processed visually. What happens when the material to be processed is inherently verbal (i.e., words), but it is presented visually as text versus aurally as speech? This issue is addressed next, and it has considerable importance to a number of applied domains. For example, air traffic controllers normally communicate with pilots via the speech channel. Miscommunications can have disastrous consequences and have been cited as a primary factor in many aviation accidents (Hawkins, 1987). As our national air space becomes increasingly congested, technological solutions are sought to improve both efficiency and safety. In the effort to develop advanced next-generation (NexGen) technologies to accomplish this goal (Joint Planning and Development Office, 2010), examination of text versus speech displays plays a critical role. Scientists are asking whether we could reduce communication transmission errors by presenting air traffic control (ATC) information in text format using a system such as controller-pilot data link (CPDL). How might presenting ATC information via text rather than speech change the pilot and air traffic controllers’ workload in an environment that already places heavy demands on visual processing resources?
## **LANGUAGE BY EAR AND BY EYE **

Processing and retention of verbal information is essential to many everyday tasks. Considerable research has been directed toward illuminating the processes and structures associated with verbal information processing (see Healy & McNamara, 1996 for an extensive review). A key theoretical assumption is that working memory consists of multiple processing streams with unique neurophysiological mechanisms for each sensory modality (Baddeley, 1992; Just et al., 2003; Posner et al., 1988; Smith & Jonides, 1997), but see the work of Rosenblum (2004) for an alternative opinion. Sensory systems are thought to have access to unique processing structures or mechanisms with the potential to function relatively independently, although subjected to a total overall resource limitation due to an attentional control mechanism, such as the central executive proposed by Baddeley and Hitch (1974). However, a key theoretical question is the extent to which verbal processing is regulated by presentation modality constraints or by a more general phonological code, irrespective of presentation format. In other words, is text processed differently from speech?
### **Evidence for Separate Codes **

Considerable evidence indicates that language is processed differently when it is heard than when it is read. The conclusion is that auditory and visual language processing draw from different pools of resources. Evidence in support of this assumption comes from several sources, including (a) neuroimaging findings showing that reading words activates distinctly different brain regions than listening to words (Posner et al., 1988); (b) serial recall paradigms demonstrating differential primacy and recency effects for word lists that are seen as opposed to those that are heard (Crowder, 1972); (c) studies of patients with neurological damage resulting in quite specific linguistic impairments (Gathercole, 1994); and (d) differential patterns of performance for text versus speech tasks in dual-task paradigms. Each of these lines of evidence is briefly explored in this chapter.
#### **Physiological Evidence **

Posner and colleagues (1988) provided strong evidence that visual and auditory word identification occurs in distinctly separate neural brain areas. Although recognition of visually presented words has generally been thought to occur through a series of stages involving visual detection, phonological followed by articulatory encoding, and then semantic identification, Posner et al. (1988) indicated that, for highly skilled readers, the phonological stage may be bypassed, and processing progresses straight from visual detection to semantic identification of words. They based this conclusion on the finding that visual word recognition does not lead to increased activation of the temporoparietal cortex areas commonly associated with phonological processing. Posner and colleagues examined cerebral blood flow via positron emission tomography (PET) while participants passively viewed nouns. The passive viewing of nouns led to increased activation of five areas, all located within the occipital lobe. Adding complexity to the reading task, such as requiring complex naming or semantic analysis, did not activate any additional posterior sites. Posner and colleagues concluded that visually specific coding takes place entirely within the occipital lobes. Conversely, auditorily presented words did not activate these occipital areas but rather activated left temporoparietal areas.

Specifically, the phonological store is thought to reside in the perisylvian region of the left hemisphere ( Figure 9.2 ) (Baddeley et al., 1998; Paulesu et al., 1993), and the articulatory rehearsal component is thought to reside in Broca’s area (Chiu et al., 2005; Paulesu et al., 1993). These areas of the phonological loop appear not to be required in highly skilled readers processing familiar words. Baddeley and colleagues (1998) suggested that reliance on visual representations of words may help account for the normal language abilities and eventual acquisition of normal vocabularies in adults with severe phonological memory impairments. Additional evidence that text versus speech material is processed differently comes from serial recall studies.
#### **Primacy and Recency in Serial Recall **

Primacy effects, or superior recall for items at the beginning of a list, and recency effects, superior recall for items at the end of a list, have been the subject of numerous investigations (Glanzer & Cunitz, 1966; Murdock, 1962; Routh, 1971, 1976; Sharps, Price, & Bence, 1996). Recency effects are stronger for auditory as opposed to visual information (Corballis, 1966; Laughery & Pinkus, 1966; Madigan, 1971; Routh, 1971, 1976). Routh (1976) demonstrated that auditory as opposed to visual presentation resulted in a stronger prerecency effect as well as a stronger recency effect.

**FIGURE 9.2 **Perisylvian region of the left hemisphere where the hypothetical phonological store is thought to reside. (Drawn by Melody Boyleston.)

Further, Routh (1976) demonstrated that the addition of a concurrent task during presentation had greater negative effects on recall of visually presented digits than on auditorily presented digits. For visually presented items, recall errors increased linearly as the difficulty level of the concurrent task increased. This observation supports the hypothesis that speech has automatic access to the phonological loop, while text (at least for most people) requires an additional processing step of converting the orthographic information into a verbal code. This automatic access can result in an advantage for speech in serial recall tasks.

*Acoustic Advantage *

People appear to know intuitively that there is an acoustic advantage when trying to hold information in an active state (i.e., in short-term or working memory). They will generally try to use an auditory code for the information if possible. This usually takes the form of subvocal rehearsal. For example, if I am trying to remember a phone number long enough to dial it, I—like most other people—will “say” the number silently in my head. This silent speech is referred to as *subvocal rehearsal *. Conrad (1964) documented the preferred status of the auditory code in his observations that visually presented letters were more likely to be confused with their rhyming counterparts during recall rather than the letters that they looked like. He termed this effect “acoustic confusion.” Thus, for example, a visually presented *T *was more likely to be confused with the acoustically similar but visually dissimilar *D *than it would be with a letter such as *F *, which is distinct phonologically. In fact, the tendency to use an auditory code is so strong it can sometimes cause problems. This preference may become a maladaptive strategy in advanced age as people continue to rely on a verbal code even when it would be more beneficial not to (Hartley et al., 2001).

In most everyday situations, hearing verbal material appears to be beneficial to short-term recall. Crowder (1970) provided empirical evidence for this acoustic advantage in a recall paradigm in which three presentation conditions were used. In all three conditions, digits were presented visually to participants. However, in the first condition, participants were instructed simply to read each digit silently to him- or herself. In a second condition, participants were instructed to say each digit aloud, and in a third condition, an experimenter spoke each digit in synchrony with the visual presentation. There was a clear recall advantage for the two conditions involving vocalization, regardless of whether it was generated by the participants or the experimenter. The recall advantage, not surprisingly, was limited to a significant recency effect, while recall for items in prerecency serial orders was not affected.
#### **Neuropsychological Evidence **

Neuropsychological studies of such disorders as aphasia and dyslexia also provide evidence for the existence of separate mechanisms for processing text versus speech (Gathercole, 1994). A case study of patient P.V. provided early evidence for a dissociation between reading and speech processing (Vallar & Baddeley, 1984). PV. had suffered a stroke that damaged her left hemisphere during early adulthood. Although she could converse normally, she demonstrated specific significant language difficulties. When performing a neuropsychological test administered through spoken commands, P.V. was profoundly impaired, particularly for more complex commands, (i.e., “Touch the yellow square inside the white box.”). P.V.’s performance improved dramatically when she was allowed to read the commands. Tests of P.V.’s memory span also showed significant dissociations for spoken versus read digits, with her memory span for digits that were read much higher. This remarkable case not only provided evidence for distinctions between processing speech and text but also helped Baddeley and colleagues refine their model of working memory.

Further evidence for the distinction between text and speech processes comes from the extensive literature on dyslexia. At least two primary forms of dyslexia have been observed (Erskine & Seymour, 2005; Hulme & Snowling, 1988). One involves difficulty with orthography, while the other primarily involves difficulties with phonology. Individuals with greater orthographic difficulties, often called a dyseidetic form or surface form of dyslexia, demonstrate greater impairment with word identification, particularly irregular words, such as *sew *, that are not pronounced according to grapheme to phoneme rules, such as the words *new *or *few *(Erskine & Seymour, 2005). Conversely, individuals with phonological dyslexia demonstrate greater difficulty with decoding pronounceable nonwords (such as *tew) *, long unfamiliar words, and other phonological tasks (Erskine & Seymour, 2005; Hulme & Snowling, 1988). Similarly, individuals with phonological aphasia have significant verbal processing deficits and yet may have spared object identification performance (Rohrer et al., 2009).

Further support for the position that reading versus listening may draw, at least in part, from separate working memory mechanisms with independent pools of processing resources comes from dual-task language investigations.
#### **Time-Sharing Text versus Speech **

In many situations it will be easier to time-share speech versus text-based tasks. As previously discussed, speech is believed to gain automatic access to the phonological store, regardless of the mental workload demands imposed by a concurrent task (Gathercole, 1994; Routh, 1971; Salame & Baddeley, 1982). This is thought to be one of the main reasons why irrelevant speech is so disruptive, as discussed in Chapter 7 . Text does not appear to have the advantage of automatic transfer. Verbal information presented visually (text) requires an extra processing step to convert the orthographic form (generally by means of the subvocal rehearsal mechanism) into a phonological form. Therefore, according to Gathercole (1994), a concurrent memory load can be expected to disrupt text processing to a greater degree than would be expected for speech processing. In situations with a high mental workload, presenting verbal information as speech rather than text can be expected to have processing advantages, particularly in environments with heavy visual processing loads, such as driving (Dingus et al., 1998; Dingus, Hulse, Mollenhauer, & Fleischman, 1997) and aviation (Risser, Scerbo, Baldwin, & McNamara, 2004, 2006).

A slight benefit was observed for simulated ATC procedural commands provided by speech versus text in a series of investigations examining differing types of working memory interference (Risser et al., 2003, 2006; Scerbo, Risser, Baldwin, & McNamara, 2003). Risser and colleagues provided participants with multiple procedural commands while they concurrently performed interference tasks designed to disrupt central executive, visuospatial, or verbal working memory. Commands were either spoken or read. Both central executive and verbal working memory interference tasks were more disruptive than visual interference regardless of modality. This was predicted on the basis that commands would evoke verbal processing regardless of their presentation modality. However, the pattern of disruption was greater for commands that were read rather than heard. Baldwin and colleagues interpreted these results as further evidence that reading requires an additional processing step and therefore is more susceptible to performance impairments in conditions of divided attention.

To this point in this chapter, the focus has primarily been on distinctions— between verbal and visual codes and between processing differences between speech and text. In the next section, the discussion changes to ways in which auditory and visual information may enhance performance through multisensory integration or cross-modal links.
## **CROSS-MODAL LINKS **

This section discusses a number of examples of how auditory and visual information complement and potentially enhance information processing and reduce mental workload. Three important areas of multisensory integration are discussed. The first pertains to AV speech, the next to cross-modal spatial attention, and the third to instances when providing information in two modalities (i.e., auditory and visual) enhances performance even when the information in one modality can be viewed as redundant.

As previously discussed regarding the McGurk effect in Chapter 8 , visual and auditory information are often combined during speech processing. Visual cues can reduce the mental workload of speech processing, particularly in noisy or other environments where the speech signal is acoustically degraded. Considerable information can be obtained visually not only by observing nonverbal body language, but also by watching the movements of the speaker’s lips and face.
### **Audiovisual Speech **

In naturalistic settings, visual and auditory information are often used together in speech perception (Massaro, 1987). Speech reading, or lipreading as it was more commonly referred to in the past, makes use of the visible features of a face, particularly aspects of the lips in relation to the cheeks, chin, and nose (Calvert et al., 1997). Initially of interest primarily in the study of hearing-impaired populations, speech reading has gained greater attention for its relevance to understanding speech in noisy environments and for its ecological relevance for speech perception in everyday contexts. Speech reading improves auditory discrimination, even under normal listening conditions (Arnold & Hill, 2001; Calvert et al., 1999; Calvert & Campbell, 2003).

Being able to watch a speaker can greatly reduce the mental workload associated with listening and improve speech recognition in adverse listening environments (Ross, Saint-Amour, Leavitt, Javitt, & Foxe, 2007). Behavioral investigations have demonstrated that in noisy listening environments the ability to watch the speaker is comparable to raising the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) by approximately 11 dB (see review in Bernstein et al., 2004). Speech reading, or viewing a speaker’s articulatory movements, can improve word recognition performance across a wide range of SNRs but appears to have maximal benefit at intermediate levels of SNR of around –12 dB for young normal-hearing listeners (Ross et al., 2007). This is in contrast to earlier estimates that proposed an “inverse effectiveness” for multisensory integration—essentially proposing that visual speech cues would have increasing benefit the more that SNRs are degraded.

Early investigations of speech reading (Erber, 1969; Sumby & Irwin, 1954) used a limited set of words and typically provided listeners with a checklist with which to attempt their word identifications. Using such a restricted set of words in combination with the checklist likely led to overestimations of the benefits of visible speech cues at levels at which auditory information was of limited benefit (see discussion in Ross et al., 2007). But, the fact that people use speech-reading cues, particularly in adverse listening conditions, is well documented (Campbell, 1986; McGurk & MacDonald, 1976). Research suggested that people tend to pay particular attention to the right side of a speaker’s mouth (Campbell, 1986; Nicholls et al., 2004). This is indicated by a reduced McGurk effect (binding of visual and auditory speech information leading to the illusory misperception of a sound) when people view mirror images of a talking face (Nicholls et al., 2004) and the finding that people are more accurate at identifying phonemes spoken by the right side of a chimeric image (Campbell, 1986). Although the right side of the mouth has also been shown to exhibit more expressive verbal information, that mirrored images reduce the McGurk effect suggests that people are not merely paying attention to visual cues with the most information. Rather, people have apparently learned to expect greater information from attention to the right side, an example of a top-down influence discussed in Chapter 8 .

Interestingly, even speech reading in the absence of auditory stimuli activates the auditory cortex (Calvert et al., 1997; Calvert & Campbell, 2003) and cortical language areas such as Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas and Heschl’s gyrus (Hauser, Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002), at least in normal-hearing individuals. (For a discussion of differences in neural circuitry during speech reading between normal-hearing and deaf individuals, see MacSweeney et al., 2002.) Calvert et al. (1997) observed that portions of the superior temporal gyri normally activated by speech sounds were activated by silent lip movements in normal-hearing participants, but only

when the lip movements were associated with actual speech sounds. Mouth and lip movements not associated with making speech sounds did not activate these areas. Pseudospeech, plausible lip movements that did not form actual words, activated the same auditory cortical areas. This indicates that cross-modal speech associations are likely occurring at an early prelexical stage during phonetic classification. Early cross-modal integration of auditory and visual information is also observed in a nonlinguistic phenomenon.
### **Cross-Modal Spatial Attention **

In the natural world, sounds often serve the purpose of directing our visual attention. A sudden sound heard coming from the left naturally directs our gaze in that direction. Laboratory studies have shown that a visual cue at a particular location in space facilitates response to an auditory stimulus at the same spatial location (Spence, Nicholls, Gillespie, & Driver, 1998). Furthermore, tactile discriminations between stimuli presented to the left and right hand can be made faster when preceded by a visual or auditory cue on the same side (Spence et al., 1998), and tactile cues facilitate response to auditory and visual targets presented on the ipsilateral (same) side as the cue. These multisensory cueing enhancements—which provide evidence for cross-modal links in spatial attention—have now been found for every combination of auditory, visual, and tactile stimuli (see chapters in Spence & Driver, 2004). These cross-modal links have important implications for human performance and display design.

Cross-modal links suggest that a common spatially referenced attentional system may be shared among sensory modalities. This contrasts with modality-specific information-processing models (Wickens, 1980, 1984; and see Bernstein et al., 2004, for a modality-specific account of language processing) that postulate separate attentional resources for individual sensory systems (Ho & Spence, 2005). A shared system view, on the other hand, predicts either enhancement or disruption during multimodal processing depending on the coherency of the information coming from the two sensory channels. Conversely, modality-specific accounts would propose relative independence between the two processing channels, at least at early sensory processing levels. Note, however, that, as Bernstein and colleagues pointed out, the McGurk effect—in which a person seen mouthing a particular phoneme (say /ga/) dubbed with a different phoneme (/ba/) is heard as saying a third, different sound (/ da/)—demonstrates that AV speech interaction can be explained by both common format and modality-specific accounts of speech binding. We return to a discussion of the McGurk effect later in the chapter, concentrating at present on spatial processing.

Cross-modal links in spatial attention have some important implications for applied settings, such as in the task of driving. Providing an alert or cue in one modality can speed spatial orientation to that location, thus facilitating detection of a stimulus in a different modality. Thus, mounting evidence suggests that auditory and haptic or tactile alerts may provide effective collision warnings.

Cross-modal spatial cueing (providing an auditory or haptic-tactile cue) in the direction of an impending collision event greatly speeds spatial orienting, event detection, and crash avoidance. For example, cross-modal links have been shown to facilitate detection and discrimination of hazards in collision avoidance situations during simulated driving. Ho and Spence (2005) conducted a series of investigations examining the relative impact of spatially predictive auditory cues on visual hazard detection in a dual-task paradigm involving high visual demand. Drivers were engaged in a simulated car-following task along with a rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) task. From time to time, they were presented with traffic “hazards.” The hazards consisted of either an apparent rapid closure rate between their vehicle and the one in front (potential front-to-rear-end collision situation) or a fast-approaching vehicle in their rearview mirror (potential tailgating-type collision situation). Drivers received an auditory warning (either neutral or nonverbal but spatially predictive or verbal and spatially predictive) prior to critical detection events. Specifically, in their series of five investigations, they examined auditory cues that were (a) neutral nonspatially predictive cues (i.e., a car horn sound coming from a speaker under the driver’s seat); (b) nonverbal spatially predictive cues (car horn coming from spatially relevant area); and (c) verbal spatially predictive cues (the word *front *or *back *coming from either a neutral location or a spatially predictive location). Spatially predictive cues enhanced hazard detection in all instances. The redundant semantically and spatially predictive cue was particularly effective. That is, Ho and Spence’s participants were faster and at least as accurate at detecting hazards appropriately (determining if there really was a hazard event and whether it was coming from the front or the back) when the auditory warning location matched the location of the hazard. Note that participants always had to look forward to assess the situation. Simulated events behind the driver could only be observed by looking at the rearview mirror (located in front of the driver). Thus, it is particularly remarkable that in the case of the car approaching swiftly from behind, the congruent auditory cue of *back *facilitated correct detection of the event requiring a forward glance. The realistic simulation of the driving setting probably facilitated this effect. Driving is a highly practiced task for most adults, and looking in the rearview mirror to examine the rear scene is likely a relatively automatic response. The main point for the present purposes is that cross-modal links have been shown to have important implications for many applied settings, including the task of driving and collision avoidance. The combined spatially and semantically predictive cue was particularly helpful in directing attention, a finding that is relevant to the design of hazard warning systems and target detection paradigms for aviation and military applications.

Providing spatial audio cues have also been shown to improve the visual search in tasks other than driving (Perrott et al., 1996; Tannen, Nelson, Bolia, Warm, & Dember, 2004). Tannen et al. had participants locate visual targets of differing detection difficulty while engaged in a simulated flight task. They proved spatial audio cues greatly enhanced detection of visual targets (relative to a no-cueing condition), particularly for the targets most difficult to detect, although spatial audio cues in this case were not significantly better than visual or combined visual and auditory cues. In addition to cross-modal spatial cueing, spatial-linguistic interactions have been observed.
#### **Spatial-Linguistic Interactions **

Driver and Spence (1994) conducted a novel set of experiments examining the impact of cross-modal spatial attention on speech processing. They used a dichotic listening task similar to the ones used by Cherry (1953) and Moray (1959) and described in previous chapters. The novel part was that, in addition to shadowing one of the two messages, participants had to perform an unrelated visual detection task or fixate on a visual screen in one of two locations (Experiment 2). The relevant visual array and the relevant speech were positioned in front of the participant to the right or left in congruent (same-side) or incongruent (opposite-side) locations. They observed that it was harder to attend to the relevant speech stream if it was coming from an incongruent location. In other words, people found it easier to shadow speech coming from the same location as the relevant visual display, even if the visual display was completely unrelated to the speech stimuli. In the same series, they also found that participants received more benefit from congruent visual speech when it was presented from the same location (vs. incongruent) as the speech stream they were shadowing (Experiment 1). Thus, regardless of whether the visual task was related (as in the visible speech) or unrelated (as in the visual detection task), these findings indicate that it is easier to process speech if it comes from the same spatial location to which visual attention is directed.

Spence and Read (2003) examined the implications of these results within the context of driving. They varied the location of a speech stimulus while participants were either performing a shadowing task by itself or in combination with a simulated driving task. Shadowing performance was always better when the speech seemed to come from directly in front of the listener, and this performance enhancement was particularly evident in the more demanding situation of performing the shadowing task in combination with the driving task. In the case of the dual-task driving condition (driving while shadowing), their results indicated that it was easier to process the speech when it was coming from where their visual attention was directed. This finding suggests that centrally located speakers (or simulating a central location for a pilot wearing a headset) might reduce the workload of processing auditory navigational messages, traffic advisories, and other similar information. Since we generally tend to look at the people we are talking to if possible, the improved shadowing performance in Spence and Read’s shadowing-only condition is not that surprising. Does this suggest that auditory in-vehicle information should always come from where the operator is likely to be looking? This question and additional issues pertaining to the design of auditory displays and spatial audio for collision avoidance warnings are explored in Chapter 11, “Auditory Display Design.” At this point, a third example of cross-modal links and their potential impact in applied settings is discussed. As discussed next, in some cases redundant information can enhance performance.

**Redundant Target Effect **

In early studies of attention and information processing, researchers often compared peoples’ reaction times to visual or auditory stimuli. It was soon discovered that when people were provided information in both modalities for the same target, performance was enhanced. This has come to be referred to as the redundant target effect (RTE). The well-documented RTE is the observation that providing redundant visual and auditory information often improves accuracy and reaction time in target detection paradigms over that which can be achieved by either auditory or visual information alone (Colquhoun, 1975; Miller, 1991; Sinnett, Soto-Faraco, & Spence, 2008).

Two early explanations for the RTE were that either (a) energy summation occurred such that the two modalities resulted in a more intense level of energy than either alone or (b) preparation enhancement such that one modality served as an alerting cue for the other (see Bernstein, 1970; Nickerson, 1973). Miller (1982) observed that the facilitation required identification and classification of stimuli in each modality rather than merely summation of sensory energy by using concurrent distracting stimuli. Trials in which concurrent distractor stimuli were present would have theoretically resulted in an equivalent level of sensory energy, yet they did not facilitate performance. Race models were proposed as an alternative. According to the race model, response in a given trial was a result of information from only one modality—either visual or auditory—and on any given trial either one could be responsible for the response. It was simply a matter of which was perceived first. In this way, over the course of several trials average response time for cross-modal trials would be expected to be faster than for either modality alone (see discussion in Miller, 1991). Subsequent research indicated that the number and nature of fast responses in cross-modal trials could not be explained based on the race model. Rather, multisensory integration must be occurring. Both modalities must be influencing responses at the same time, a phenomenon referred to as *intersensory facilitation *(Nickerson, 1973; Sinnett et al., 2008).

RTEs also occur in more applied settings and are more pronounced in dualtask conditions than single-task situations. Levy and Pashler (2008) examined the redundant modality information in a simulated driving context. Both a redundant tactile cue (Experiment 1) and a redundant auditory cue (Experiment 2) improved brake response times (the visual cue was the onset of the brake lights of a lead car) in both single- and dual-task conditions. Importantly, providing a redundant tactile or auditory cue also significantly increased the likelihood that people would prioritize the braking task in the dual-task trials. Participants had been instructed that the braking task was most important, and that they should not even make a response to the other concurrent task (distinguishing between one and two tones) if it occurred at the same time as a braking event. Yet, despite these instructions, a significant number of people failed to prioritize the driving task sufficiently to withhold making a response to the tone task at least some of the time. In these cases, responses to the tone task were made at the expense of brake response time. That is, not surprisingly, when participants first responded to the tone task before braking, brake response times were significantly delayed. The implications of these results are clear. Even when a task such as driving should clearly be prioritized, people may still complete a second, less-important task first (like responding to a caller on a cell phone) at the expense of performance in the driving task. Providing a redundant cue for the lead car braking increased the probability that people prioritized the driving/braking task—a result that has important implications for designing effective collision-warning systems as discussed in Chapter 11. Other driving simulation investigations have also noted superior hazard avoidance behavior for combined auditory and visual warning over either modality alone (Kramer, Cassavaugh, Horrey, Becic, & Mayhugh, 2007).

Sinnett et al. (2008) demonstrated that intersensory competition rather than facilitation can occur in some circumstances. They devised a novel set of experiments in which the stimuli were the same but the instructions given to participants emphasized either simple speeded detection or speeded modality discrimination (Experiment 1). Intersensory facilitation was observed when participants were asked to make a simple speeded response (0.5% misses in bimodal trials relative to 3.0% and 3.6% for unimodal visual and auditory trials, respectively). When asked to make a speeded modality discrimination, response times for bimodal trials were significantly longer than either visual or auditory unimodal trials.

In the final section of this chapter, additional examples of times when auditory and visual information either enhance or disrupt performance are provided. Next, the focus is on when the tasks presented in different modalities must be time-shared. So, unique information is coming in from each modality; therefore, it must be processed separately rather than integrated.
## **TIME-SHARING AUDITORY AND VISUAL TASKS **

There are many situations for which people need or want to perform two or more tasks at the same time. For example, we listen to music or the radio and have conversations while walking or driving, read notes and other written material during teleconferences, and listen to music while studying, exercising, and completing daily activities. Our ability to time-share two or more tasks has received considerable attention in the scientific literature (see Pashler, 1994; Schumacher et al., 2001; Wickens, 2002).

Wickens (1980, 1984, 2002) examined the influence of task presentation modality on time-sharing efficiency in a number of investigations. Wickens pointed out that time-sharing efficiency for concurrent tasks differed by more than simply the difficulty of each task. Difficulty for individual tasks can be assessed by a participant’s ability to perform the task by itself under single-task conditions. Two tasks requiring similar processing resources can be time-shared less proficiently than a different set of tasks that, although more difficult, rely on different processing resources. Much like Baddeley’s model, Wickens proposed that a single-channel model of processing cannot adequately explain the existing evidence on patterns of dual-task interference. Wickens’s multiple-resource theory (MRT) proposed in 1980 was intended primarily to account for information processing during multiple-task performance and to allow prediction of performance breakdown in high-workload situations (Wickens, 2002). According to MRT, time-sharing efficiency, as observed through performance of each task, is moderated by the information-processing channel (auditory or visual), the type of code (spatial or verbal), and processing stages (encoding and comprehension or response selection). In later years, Wickens (2002) added a fourth dimension distinguishing between focal and ambient visual processing. Each of these dichotomies has important implications for the topics discussed in this chapter. An emphasis here is placed on the information-processing channel, otherwise known as the presentation modality.

Two tasks presented in different modalities (visual-auditory) tend to be timeshared more efficiently than two tasks presented in the same modality (auditoryauditory or visual-visual) (Wickens, 1984). For example, imagine the scenario of a pilot maintaining control of an aircraft while navigating, communicating, and avoiding hazards. What is the best method of presenting different types of information to the pilot? Numerous cockpit displays have been developed to assist the pilot with these tasks, and MRT has played an important role in their development.

To illustrate the visual-verbal dichotomy, imagine that you are driving and receiving directions to a new destination. Will it be easier for you to read directions while driving or hear them? Empirical evidence indicated that it is easier to time-share the visual driving task with vocal guidance rather than visual map directions (Streeter et al., 1985). In another example, Wickens and Colcombe (2007) showed that an auditory cockpit display of traffic information (CDTI) alerting system was processed more efficiently than a visual CDTI when traffic monitoring was time-shared with a visual tracking task simulating flight control.

Sonification (presenting complex information in the form of continuous auditory graphs) has been shown to improve visual monitoring of anesthetized patients’ status in a simulated operation room compared to monitoring the same information displayed visually (Watson & Sanderson, 2004). Sonification, an important relatively new form of auditory display, is discussed further in Chapter 11. Many more examples can be found of improved time-sharing efficiency following the application of cross-modal task pairing, in line with the predictions of MRT (Horrey & Wickens, 2004; Levy et al., 2006; Sodnik et al., 2008).

An important exception to the benefit of time-sharing cross-modal task pairings has been observed in certain circumstances and is worthy of discussion (Latorella, 1998; Wickens & Liu, 1988). Wickens and Liu (1988) pointed out the specifics of these circumstances. One example is when a nonurgent discrete auditory task is timeshared with a continuous visual task. For example, Helleberg and Wickens (2003) found that discrete auditory messages simulating ATC communications disrupted ongoing performance of a visual flight task more than text-based communications. The onset of the auditory stimulus can sometimes preempt or disrupt processing of the continuous visual task at inopportune times. In these situations, providing a visual alert that can be monitored at times deemed appropriate by the operator may be time-shared more efficiently.

In the CDTI example described (Wickens & Colcombe, 2007), evidence for a negative auditory preemption effect was observed when the auditory alert provided excessive false alarms (Experiment 2). In these instances, the pilot’s attention was drawn away from the flight control task unnecessarily by false alarms with the auditory alert condition, and tracking performance suffered more than when the display with a high false alarm rate was presented in the visual modality. Despite these important exceptions, performing cross-modal task pairings (i.e., an auditory task concurrently with a visual task) generally results in lower mental workload levels and improved performance relative to intramodal task pairings (i.e., two auditory tasks or two visual tasks). However, that said, make no mistake that this in any way suggests that the two tasks will not interfere with each other as long as they are presented in different modalities. Numerous examples of auditory tasks disrupting visual tasks abound.
### **Perfect Time-Sharing: A Myth **

The previous discussion focused on only one aspect of MRT, presentation modality. As long as tasks require effortful processing (regardless of their presentation modality), there is still potential for performance on one or both tasks to decline. It is important to reiterate this point. The previous discussion should not be taken to imply that a verbal task (such as talking on a cell phone) would not be expected to interfere with a visual task (like driving a car). MRT and related theories simply postulate that the pattern and degree of dual-task interference will vary with different task pairings; thus, talking on a cell phone can be expected to be *less *disruptive than reading text, but both activities can be disruptive. In fact, there are numerous examples in the literature of an auditory task disrupting performance on a visual task.

Performing an auditory task has been noted to cause inattentional blindness during simulated driving tasks (McCarley et al., 2004; Pizzighello & Bressan, 2008; Strayer & Drews, 2007; Strayer et al., 2003). Inattentional blindness is a phenomenon in which people are looking at an object or scene but fail to notice some critical aspect because their attention is directed elsewhere. In one investigation, people were talking on a hands-free cell phone while engaged in simulated driving (Strayer et al., 2003). Compared to when they simply drove, people in the cell phone condition recalled significantly fewer roadside signs despite the fact that eye-tracking data indicated that they had looked at the signs.

There is abundant evidence that conversing on a cellular or mobile phone impairs driving performance despite the fact that one is primarily an auditory-vocal task and the other primarily a visual-manual task (Caird et al., 2008; McCarley et al., 2004; Rakauskas, Gugerty, & Ward, 2004; Reed & Green, 1999). As discussed previously in Chapter 8 , using a cellular phone while driving dramatically increases the chance of motor vehicle collisions (Lam, 2002; McEvoy et al., 2005, 2007).

Jolicoeur (1999) proposed that the dual-task interference effects of an auditory task on visual information stems from a more central interference mechanism that disrupts visual encoding, thereby preventing short-term consolidation of visual information into working memory. Jolicoeur observed that an auditory tone discrimination task disrupted recall of visually presented letters only when the presentation of the auditory tone followed presentation of the letters within 250 ms or less (when participants would be expected to be attempting to encode the letters). When the tones were presented 600 ms after letter presentation, recall performance was not disrupted. When the tone discrimination task was made more difficult (distinguishing between four tones versus two tones), the effects of presentation delay were even more pronounced. This central mechanism is equivalent to the processing stage component in Wickens’ MRT model and coincides with the psychological refractory period (Pashler, 1998b). Jolicoeur and others (Brisson & Jolicoeur, 2007; Brisson, Leblanc, & Jolicoeur, 2009; Levy et al., 2006; Pashler, 1994; Tombu & Jolicoeur, 2004; Welford, 1952) argued for the existence of a centralized bottleneck to explain the interference effects observed with concurrent auditory and visual tasks (but see Meyer & Kieras, 1997; Schumacher et al., 2001, for alternative explanations).

Posner et al. (1988) also suggested that the visual-spatial attentional system is connected to a more general attentional system involved in language processing. Evidence for this came from the observation that participants were less able to benefit from a visual cue in a spatial location task when they were simultaneously required to pay close attention to spoken words. Regardless of where the processing interference occurs, speech processing can interfere with visual tasks and visual-spatial attention.
## **SUMMARY **

Information can be processed in different ways (i.e., using a visual, verbal, or spatial code) regardless of the modality in which it is presented. Language is processed, at least initially, using a verbal code regardless of whether it is presented visually in the form of text or aurally in the form of speech. Forming a verbal code from text requires an extra processing step; therefore, reading, relative to listening, tends to be more disrupted by concurrent working memory demands.

Cross-modal links facilitate speech processing, spatial location, and speeded response in normal circumstances. Being able to see a speaker talking improves speech intelligibility, particularly for hard-of-hearing individuals or when SNRs are poor. Similarly, providing auditory cues speeds visual target detection and localization.

When performing two tasks at once, performance is generally better if one task is presented through the visual channel while the other is presented through the auditory channel. There are some exceptions to this rule. But, as predicted by MRT, generally it is more difficult to watch two things at the same time or hear two things at the same time than it is to divide attention across our sensory systems. Timesharing efficiency is affected by more than the modality in which the information is presented. The code (i.e., verbal vs. spatial) of processing plays a major role. It is more difficult to time-share two tasks that both require verbal or spatial processing codes than it is to time-share tasks when one requires a verbal code and the other a spatial code. Regardless of the input modality and processing code, time-sharing efficiency is governed by a centralized limit. Theoretical differences arise over the precise nature of this difference (is it a structural bottleneck, a central attentional resource limitation?), but nearly all information-processing accounts agree that there is an upper limit to the number of things people can process at any given time.
## **CONCLUDING REMARKS **

Information coming in through the visual channel generally facilitates and supports auditory processing. Hearing a sound helps guide our visual attention toward the spatial location of the source of the sound, thus aiding detection and identification of objects in our environment. Providing complementary or supplementary information through the auditory channel can serve to offset some of the visual processing load in visually demanding tasks, such as driving, flying, and monitoring visual displays. The topic of using the auditory channel in informational displays is discussed more fully in Chapter 11. The facilitatory effects of complementary visual and auditory information are particularly beneficial to understanding speech in degraded listening conditions or when the listener is experiencing hearing loss such as that which accompanies the normal aging process. In the next chapter, the impact of aging and age-related hearing loss on auditory cognition is discussed.