# Unknown Chapter

*Source: Auditory Cognition and Human Performance by C. L. Baldwin (2012)*

---

# 5 **Theories and Techniques of Mental Workload Assessment **

## **INTRODUCTION **

*Mental workload *refers to a psychological construct that has wide currency in areas of applied psychology and human factors. The concept has been found to be useful in understanding why and how the many different tasks that people perform at home, work, and leisure are carried out effectively at times and not so successfully at others. Mental workload assessment has played an integral role in designing and evaluating many human-machine systems found in working environments, as well as in many other facets of life. A primary aim of this book and the chapters to come is to discuss factors that affect the mental workload associated with processing auditory information.

In this chapter, the term *mental workload *is first illustrated by providing some everyday examples and then by discussing more formal definitions. Key theoretical issues pertaining to mental workload and workload assessment techniques form a central focus. This discussion includes an examination of the strengths and limitations of different ways in which workload is assessed, particularly as they apply to the processing of sound. In addition, the relationship between the concept of mental workload as used by human factors practitioners and that of working memory (WM) resources as used by cognitive scientists is explored.

An everyday example serves to illustrate the basic concept of mental workload and the complexity of its assessment. Most of us have had an experience of teaching someone a new task that we ourselves can do quite well. For example, perhaps you are teaching a child mental arithmetic or a teenager to drive. The task may be so well learned to you that you do not need to put much mental effort or thought into it. It has become nearly “automatic,” to use Schneider and Shiffrin’s (1977) term. However, to the novice, or person learning the task, considerable concentration and mental effort may be required to perform the task. The degree or quantity of this concentration and mental exertion is essentially what is meant by the term *mental workload *. Moreover, the amount of mental effort expended by the novice may or may not be reflected in the performance outcome: The child may sometimes correctly produce the right answer and sometimes not, and the teenager may successfully carry out a difficult driving maneuver or fail it. In both cases, the individuals will experience considerable mental workload. As this example illustrates, simply examining the outcome of a situation (i.e., whether the right sum is derived) often provides little insight into the amount of mental effort required or expended. Rather, the mental workload involved must itself be assessed, independent of performance outcome.

The term *mental workload *has been used extensively in the field of human factors and more generally the human performance literature for several decades. Mental workload is often used synonymously with terms such as mental effort, mental resources, and the attentional or information-processing requirements of a given task, situation, or human-machine interface. Precise definitions vary, and at present a single standard definition of mental workload has not been established. Mental workload is generally agreed to be a multidimensional, multifaceted construct (Baldwin, 2003; Gopher & Donchin, 1986; Hancock & Caird, 1993; Kramer, 1991), often referencing the relationship between the task structure and demands and the time available for performing the given task. Current theories of mental workload and its measurement stem from earlier work concerning theories of attention. Much of this early work examined the attentional demands of auditory processing and was discussed in the previous chapter. Chapter 5 examines theoretical perspectives pertaining to mental workload and the major assessment techniques used to measure it. Central to much of this work is the idea that humans are limited in the amount of information they can process or tasks they can perform at any given time, an idea clearly confirmed by early work in the cognitive psychology of attention (Broadbent, 1958; Moray, 1967; Kahneman, 1973). Establishing effective means to ensure that the mental workload required by a given task or set of tasks is within the limits of a human’s processing capacity has played a critical role in several areas of application in human factors.
## **LIMITED-CAPACITY MODELS **

The notion that humans can only process a limited amount of information at any given time can be traced to early filter models of attention, such as the one proposed by Broadbent (1958). Filter models, notably Broadbent’s (1958) early selection model and Deutsch and Deutsch’s (1963) late selection model, proposed that a structural mechanism acted like a bottleneck preventing more than a limited amount of information from being processed at any given moment. Later, the idea that information processing was regulated by a more general capacity limit rather than a specific structural mechanism was explored by Moray (1967) and further developed by Kahneman (1973).

The idea that there is an upper limit to the amount of mental effort or attention that one can devote to mental work became a central component in Kahneman’s (1973) capacity model and remains a central tenet of mental workload theory today. Daniel Kahneman’s (1973) influential book, *Attention and Effort *, described one of the earliest conceptual models of attention as limited (or limiting) processing capacity. In this model, mental effort is used synonymously with attention and is accompanied by the ensuing implication that humans are able to direct, exert, and invest attention among multiple stimuli.

As Kahneman (1973) pointed out, in everyday life people often simultaneously perform multiple tasks (i.e., driving a car while listening and engaging in conversation, taking notes while listening to a professor’s lecture). Kahneman theorized that rather than examining the point at which stimuli are filtered, it might be more fruitful to consider cognitive processes in terms of resources, which much like physical resources have an upper limit. Because we are able to direct this mental effort, we are free to allocate our attention flexibly among the tasks, allotting more attention to one task than another at different times. So, for example, we might pay more attention (exert more mental effort) to the task of driving as we are entering a congested freeway and thus pay little attention to the conversation, or we might be paying so much attention to listening to a difficult or interesting point made by the professor that we neglect the task of writing notes. According to Kahneman’s model, as long as the total amount of attention demanded by the concurrent tasks does not exceed our capacity, we are able to perform both successfully. However, when the concurrent demands exceed our capacity, performance on one or more tasks will degrade.

As discussed in Chapter 4 , Kahneman’s (1973) model proposed that attentional capacity was not a fixed quantity but rather varies as a function of an individual’s arousal level, enduring disposition, and momentary intentions. So, for example, if an individual is sleep deprived or bored, he or she will have fewer attentional resources to devote to any given task or set of tasks. Illustrating this concept, nearly everyone can probably think of a time when he or she was tired and found it hard to pay attention to a conversation or lecture, particularly if the material discussed was complex, unfamiliar, or seemed uninteresting.

Kahneman’s (1973) model focusing on a limited capacity of attentional resources remains an important concept in mental workload. It was also influential to later theories of time-sharing efficiency, such as the influential model of dual-task performance proposed by Wickens (1980, 1984) called multiple resource theory (MRT). Resource theories, in general, assume a limited amount of attentional resources that can be flexibly allocated from one task to another. As discussed in more detail in this chapter, MRT proposes that these resources are divided into separate “pools” of resources for different aspects of processing. As Moray, Dessouky, Kijowski, and Adapathya (1991) pointed out, of the many attentional models in existence (strict single-channel model, a limited-capacity channel model; a single-resource model, or a multiple-resource model), all share the concept that humans have a limited capacity of mental resources. Resource theories form a cornerstone of most theories of mental workload.
## **RESOURCE THEORIES **

Rather than focusing on a structural filter mechanism, or attenuation device, resource theories build on Kahneman’s proposal that human performance is a function of one’s ability to allocate processing resources from a limited reserve capacity (Kahneman, 1973). Resource theory, as this position came to be called, and its focus on allocation of resources from a limited reserve is currently a widely held view of attentional processing (see discussions in Matthews et al., 2000; Pritchard & Hendrickson, 1985; Wickens, 1991, 2002). However, controversy still ensues over whether resources primarily stem from a single reserve or multiple pools. At present, the most commonly held view is that of multiple reserves or pools of resources.
### **Multiple Resource Theory **

MRT originated from examination of how people time-share two or more activities (Wickens, 1980, 1984). Numerous situations were observed for which the timesharing efficiency of two tasks interacted in ways that were not easily predicted by examination of the performance on the individual tasks (Wickens, 1980; Wickens & Liu, 1988). Wickens’s MRT stemmed primarily from observations that a singlepool model of attentional resources was inadequate to explain the results of many dual-task investigations in which visual-auditory task combinations could be timeshared more efficiently than either visual-visual or auditory-auditory combinations (Wickens, 1984). Wickens’s MRT postulated that time-sharing efficiency was affected not only by the difficulty of each task but also by the extent to which each task competed for common mechanisms or structures (Wickens, 1984). According to MRT, tasks can compete for common mechanisms with functionally separate “reservoirs” or pools of attentional capacity in three ways. First, tasks may compete for the same modality of input (i.e., visual vs. auditory) or response (vocal vs. manual). Second, tasks can compete for the same stage of processing (perceptual, central, or response execution). And third, tasks may compete for the same code of perceptual or central processing (verbal vs. spatial). This version of MRT explained the results of a considerable number of dual-task investigations in which cross-modal (visualauditory) tasks were time-shared more efficiently than intramodal (visual-visual or auditory-auditory) tasks.

Wickens (Wickens, 1991; Wickens & Liu, 1988) pointed out, however, that there are exceptions to the predictions of MRT with respect to the input modality resource pool dichotomy. One pattern of results in dual-task studies—when a continuous visual task is time-shared more efficiently with a discrete task that is visual rather than auditory—conflicts with the MRT prediction for input modality. For example, auditory air traffic control (ATC) communications (relative to visual [text-based] data-link-type communications) have been shown to be more disruptive in the visually demanding task of pilots performing approach scenarios during simulated flight (Latorella, 1998). Cross-modality performance is thought to suffer in this paradigm because the auditory task “preempts” the continuous visual task. That is, pilots disengaged from the visual task to perform the auditory task, resulting in efficient performance of the auditory task but degradation of the continuous visual task. Conversely, in this paradigm performance of a discrete visual task appears less disruptive to maintaining performance on the continuous visual task (Wickens & Liu, 1988). These findings suggest that, at least under certain circumstances, an aspect of processing other than the modality of input—in this case the power of auditory preemption—has a greater impact on task performance.
### **Criticisms of Resource Theory **

Resource theory is not without its critics. In famously bold words, Navon (1984) referred to mental resources as a theoretical “soup stone”—devoid of any true substance, as in the tale of the poor traveler with only a stone to make soup. Navon distinguished between two factors affecting information processing and task performance. Navon called these “alterants,” which can be at several different states at any given time, thus affecting multiple levels of task performance (i.e., anxiety); and “commodities,” akin to resources, which consist of units that can only be used by one process or user at any given point in time. Navon pointed out that with any given performance resource function (PRF; Norman & Bobrow, 1975) mapping dual-task decrement, it is impossible to distinguish between decrements stemming from commodities (or resources) and alterants. Therefore, according to Navon:

Attempts to measure mental workload, to identify resource pools, to predict task interference by performance resource functions, or to incorporate resource allocation in process models of behavior *may prove as disappointing *as would attempts to isolate within the *human mind analogues of the functional components of the digital computer *. (p. 232)

An alternative idea is that, rather than separate resource pools, capacity limits may stem from constraints in the cognitive architecture of the processing mechanisms (see Matthews et al., 2000, for a review). A related and important construct that has received considerable attention in the cognitive science literature is the notion of working memory and its structures and resources. This topic is discussed in more detail in a further section.

Despite existing criticisms, MRT has been the single most influential theory in mental workload measurement to date (see the discussions in Colle & Reid, 1997; Sarno & Wickens, 1995; Tsang, Velazquez, & Vidulich, 1996). Here are just some of the many observations that can be explained within a MRT context: Numerous investigators have observed that performance on tracking tasks is disrupted more by concurrent spatial tasks than concurrent verbal tasks (Klapp & Netick, 1988; Payne, Peters, Birkmire, & Bonto, 1994; Sarno & Wickens, 1995; Xun, Guo, & Zhang, 1998). This implies that when the main task that an operator must perform is primarily visual or spatial (i.e., driving along a curvy road), then any additional information presented to the operator may be processed more efficiently if it requires a different type of processing (i.e., listening to verbal directions rather than reading a spatial map). In this situation, as in many others, the key to interference is the perceptual or processing code, rather than simply the modality in which information is received. In other words, it is more difficult to read text and listen to someone talking than it is to extract information from a spatial display while listening to someone talk. Both text and speech rely on a verbal processing code and therefore are more likely to interfere with another verbal task regardless of whether the concurrent verbal task is presented visually or auditorily (Risser, Scerbo, Baldwin, & McNamara, 2003, 2004). As Risser and colleagues pointed out, similar predictions for interference can be derived from Baddeley’s (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974, 1994) model of working memory, in which the phonological loop and the visuospatial sketch pad are thought to process different types of information. Recall that these two mechanisms are thought to be relatively independent “slave systems” in working memory, but that each is controlled by the central executive system and therefore still subject to an overall processing limit. Parallels have been drawn between the concepts of working memory structure and MRT mental workload in previous literature (Klapp & Netick, 1988). More recently, similar parallels have been drawn between current concepts of working memory resources and mental workload. We therefore turn to a discussion of these new developments next.
## **WORKING MEMORY PROCESSES **

An examination of the literature pertaining to mental workload and the literature pertaining to working memory indicates a striking overlap in terminology. Working memory has been defined as “a limited capacity system, which temporarily maintains and stores information, and supports human thought processes by providing an interface between perception, long-term memory and action” (Baddeley, 2003, p. 829). From this definition, we see reference to a limited-capacity system for performing mental activity, a theme central to most current theories of mental workload and its assessment. The association between the constructs of mental workload and working memory was discussed in an article by Parasuraman and Caggiano (2005). They pointed out that mental workload is influenced by external, bottom-up factors in the environment and top-down processes within the individual. These internal, top-down influences are regulated to a large extent by working memory capacity and individual differences in that capacity. Examining the performance impact of individual differences in working memory capacity has led to an extensive body of literature in recent years (Conway, Cowan, Bunting, Therriault, & Minkoff, 2002; Engle, 2001; Engle, Kane, & Tuholski, 1999). Much of this literature pertains to language processing and comprehension and is therefore discussed in subsequent sections and chapters. For now, we limit our discussion to more general concepts.

Daneman and Carpenter (1980) developed a means of assessing differences in working memory capacity. They called their test the *reading span test *. The test involves reading a series of sentences presented in sets of one, two or three, and so on and then recalling the last word of each sentence in the set. The number of sentence final words that can be remembered (the size of the sentence set that can be both processed and stored) is used to calculate an individual’s reading span. Daneman and Carpenter found that individual reading spans ranged from two to five, and that individual scores correlated with several tests of reading comprehension. Several variations of Daneman and Carpenter’s original paradigm have been developed and are widely used as measures of working memory capacity (for a review, see Conway et al., 2005).

Towse and colleagues reexplored the concept of working memory (Towse, Hitch, Hamilton, Peacock, & Hutton, 2005). As the authors pointed out, working memory is more than a capacity-limited temporary storage. They used an interesting analogy: comparing the capacity construct to the size of a traveler’s suitcase. They suggested that individual differences in working memory might be compared to individual differences in the sizes of suitcases a traveler might choose. People travel with a variety of sizes. However, suitcase size alone does not determine how much one can bring along, let alone how useful the individual items packed might be. Efficient packing processes can result in tremendous variability in how many items and the appropriateness of the items included in the traveler’s suitcase. Regardless of whether working memory performance relies primarily on the capacity, efficiency, or some combination of the two, working memory span scores show strong relationships with a wide variety of other cognitive tasks and therefore appear to represent some general processing capability. Current discussion surrounding working memory resources frequently centers on the extent to which working memory involves separate components.
## **MULTIPLE RESOURCES—MULTIPLE NETWORKS **

Recall that MRT suggests that different modalities of input and different codes of processing will rely on separate pools or resources. This idea may be compared to theories coming from a separate line of reasoning that suggests that memories are processed and stored in the same neural pathways and networks initially used to encode the information. This idea can be traced to the writings of Carl Wernicke in the late 1800s (see Feinberg & Farah, 2006; Gage & Hickok, 2005). According to this perspective, retaining a memory of an auditory or visual event utilizes the same neural pathways that were activated when the event was first experienced. This theory has received support in more recent literature (see discussions in Jonides, Lacey, & Nee, 2005; Squire, 1986) and provides a potential neurophysiological explanation for the MRT concept of separate resource pools. Perhaps rather than thinking in terms of resource pools, the ability to time-share two tasks can be understood as more efficient if different neural mechanisms (i.e., visual vs. auditory pathways, object identification vs. location, occipital lobe vs. temporal lobe networks) are involved in the encoding, processing, storage, and response of each task.

Jonides et al. (2005) discussed the hypothesis that the brain mechanisms responsible for working memory might be the same as those responsible for perceptual encoding. They suggested that this would mean that there would be separate pathways for visual, spatial, and auditory stimuli and further that posterior regions would be involved in basic encoding and storage. However, if the storage occurs in the presence of distracting stimuli (interference), then frontal areas serving selective attentional processes would be involved to regulate and control the maintenance of information through rehearsal. Indeed, as Jonides and colleagues pointed out, there is evidence for their hypothesis from both brain imaging studies and from observations of persons with specific brain lesions.

Support for the shared neural mechanism account discussed by Jonides and colleagues (2005) comes from observations that sensory event-related potential (ERP) components are highly correlated with and thus good predictors of working memory span and fluid intelligence (Brumback, Low, Gratton, & Fabiani, 2004). Brumback and colleagues observed that N100 responses to stimuli in simple auditory tasks varied significantly between individuals with high and low scores on a working memory span measure thought to rely heavily on verbal working memory. The N100 responses of individuals with high working memory span were significantly larger than those with low working memory span. Similarly, a visual sensory ERP component (P150) differed between high and low performers on the Raven Progressive Matrices (RPM) test, a nonverbal assessment of general intelligence. Brumback and colleagues concluded that modality-specific sensory components are good predictors of working memory span and fluid intelligence measures presented in that same modality. In other words, visual sensory components are related to visual-spatial working memory processes, and auditory sensory components share a strong relationship with verbal working memory. This observation is in line with the hypothesis of Jonides et al. (2005) that sensory perceptual processes and working memory processes may share the same neural mechanisms. It also provides a possible neurophysiological explanation for numerous empirical investigations that demonstrated that cross-modality task pairings (visual and auditory) versus same-modality task pairings (auditory-auditory) often lead to more efficient performance. The extent to which two concurrent tasks rely on the same neural mechanisms or pathways would determine their degree of structural interference. A large amount of structural interference or competition between the two tasks would result in the need to process information serially (i.e., one task at a time in rapid alternation) to time-share the common neural mechanism. Conversely, if the two tasks relied primarily on separate mechanisms, more efficient parallel processing would be permitted.

The ability to store and manipulate information temporarily, referred to as working memory, plays an important role in our ability to process sounds, particularly speech. Numerous investigations conducted since the 1990s have been specifically designed to examine the nature of the working memory resources involved in language processing.

An ongoing debate regarding the nature of working memory resources in language comprehension is particularly germane to our current discussion. Two diverging perspectives exist regarding the degree to which deficits in working memory will automatically result in deficits in language comprehension. The debate centers around whether the working memory resources involved in language comprehension are domain general or domain specific: a single system for all or separate resources for different language processes (DeDe, Caplan, Kemtes, & Waters, 2004; Friedmann & Gvion, 2003; Just & Carpenter, 1992; Just, Carpenter, & Keller, 1996; Waters & Caplan, 1996). One perspective emphasizes capacity limits and a single general working memory system or resource serving all language functions (see, e.g., Daneman & Carpenter, 1980; Fedorenko, Gibson, & Rohde, 2006; Just & Carpenter, 1992; Just, Carpenter, & Keller, 1996). An opposing position argues instead that there are separate domain-specific resources serving different language processes (Caplan & Waters, 1999; DeDe et al., 2004; Friedmann & Gvion, 2003; Waters & Caplan, 1996). Support can be found for both positions, and major arguments for each perspective are briefly considered here due to their relevance for assessing mental workload from a resource capacity perspective. For more detailed examination and developments in this ongoing debate, see reviews in the work of Caplan and Waters (1999), Fedorenko et al. (2006), and MacDonald and Christiansen (2002).

The debate originated with a seminal article published by Just and Carpenter (1992) in which they proposed a capacity theory of language comprehension. According to their capacity theory, processing and storage of verbal material are both constrained by working memory activation. Variation in the ability to activate working memory processes (termed *capacity *) was thought to account for the substantial individual differences observed in language comprehension abilities. They reasoned that people with larger working memory capacities were able to hold multiple interpretations of initially ambiguous sentences in memory until subsequent information was presented that would disambiguate the message. Conversely, people with lower working memory capacity would be unable to hold these multiple interpretations in memory and would therefore be more likely to make sentence-processing errors if the later information supported the less-obvious interpretation of an ambiguous sentence. If these initially ambiguous sentences are later resolved in an unpreferred way (meaning the less-obvious form of the initial subject was used), they are called “garden path” sentences. The name refers to the idea that they initially support one interpretation (leading listeners or readers down a garden path) only to present conflicting information later in the sentence that requires reanalysis of the initial interpretation. An example of a garden path sentence used by King and Just (1991) is, “The reporter that the senator attacked admitted the error.” As Just and Carpenter (1992) pointed out, this sentence is difficult for two reasons. First, it contains an embedded clause (a sentence part or clarifying idea in the middle of the sentence: “that the senator attacked”) that interrupts the main part or clause of the sentence (which refers to someone doing the admitting). Second, the initial noun *reporter *plays a double role of both the subject of the main clause of the sentence (the person who did the admitting) and the object of the second clause (the person who was attacked), which is embedded in the middle of the sentence. So, this first noun, reporter, must be kept in memory while side information about it is obtained before the main point of the sentence is made clear.

In support of their capacity theory, Just and Carpenter (1992) pointed out that while these sentences are generally difficult for everyone, they are particularly difficult for people with low working memory spans. Note that working memory span can be assessed with a variation of Daneman and Carpenter’s (1980) reading span paradigm discussed in this chapter. Working memory span, or simply “span,” involves simultaneously processing and storing verbal material, and variations of Daneman and Carpenter’s paradigm are in widespread use today (see Bayliss, Jarrold, Gunn, & Baddeley, 2003; Engle, 2001; Kane, Bleckley, Conway, & Engle, 2001).

Just and Carpenter (1992) proposed that the working memory capacity measured by span tasks is an essential factor constraining all language processing tasks. They suggested that people with high spans (greater working memory capacity) are better able to keep multiple meanings or roles of individual words within a sentence in memory while processing later components. They also pointed to the observation that older adults tend to have more difficulty comprehending difficult garden path sentences than young adults. Since older adults also tend to have smaller span scores than their younger counterparts, this is discussed as supporting evidence for a general working memory system that affects language comprehension in general.

Neuropsychological evidence for a general working memory resource capacity comes from the observation that people with a variety of different aphasias (impaired ability to produce or comprehend language) share a common deficit involving greater difficulty processing more syntactically complex sentences (Miyake, Carpenter, & Just, 1995). People with left hemisphere aphasia (regardless of the specific type) perform more poorly on tasks requiring the use of syntactic structure to extract meaning from sentences, like in the garden path sentences previously described. Performance impairment in these individuals relates more directly to the overall working memory resources that can be devoted to the task (as assessed by span scores) and the degree of overall global neurological impairment rather than the specific type of impairment (see review in Caplan & Waters, 1999). Support for a common deficit in aphasic sentence comprehension performance has also been found using a computational modeling approach (Haarmann, Just, & Carpenter, 1997).

Waters and Caplan (Caplan & Waters, 1999; Waters & Caplan, 1996) have argued instead that separate working memory resources support different types of language tasks. This theoretical position has been referred to as a domain-specific theory of working memory (Caplan & Waters, 1999; Fedorenko et al., 2006). They suggest that language tasks that require online processing (interpretation of immediate verbal information like processing syntactic complexity) rely on a verbal working memory that is at least partially independent of a more general controlled attention form of working memory resource involved in “off-line” language comprehension tasks. In their view, traditional working memory span tasks, such as those modeled after Daneman and Carpenter’s (1980) reading span task, should be related to the controlled attention working memory resource system, but rather unrelated to the verbal working memory system involved in syntactic processing. Note this is contrary to Just and Carpenter’s (1992) position that all language processes are related to a general working memory activation capability as assessed by reading span scores. As evidence for their position, Waters and Caplan (1996) discussed the observation that individuals with reading span scores of 0 to 1 (i.e., patients with Alzheimer’s disease) maintain their ability to utilize syntactic structure to interpret the meaning of sentences, and that they are able to do so even when their working memory systems are busy processing concurrent verbal material (i.e., a digit memory load) (Waters, Caplan, & Rochon, 1995). Further support for their model is derived from the results of structural equation modeling (SEM) approaches examining the relationship between age, verbal working memory, and performance on online syntactic processing versus off-line sentence comprehension tasks (DeDe et al., 2004). Results of their modeling investigation indicated very different patterns of relationships for the different language processing tasks. A direct relationship was found between age and performance on the syntactic processing task, and this relationship was not mediated by verbal working memory. However, performance on the sentence comprehension task was directly related to verbal working memory, and this relationship was not mediated by age.

Neurophysiological and neuropsychological evidence can be found to support the position that there are distinct multiple pathways for different types of language processing tasks, with a distinction generally arising between syntactic and semantic aspects. For example, using positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, Caplan and colleagues (Caplan, Alpert, & Waters, 1998) observed that different cortical areas were associated with increased regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) when using syntax to extract meaning from sentences versus when they were making semantic plausibility judgments in sentences with varying numbers of propositions. Specifically, rCBF increased in the dominant perisylvian association cortex, a portion of Broca’s area, when participants were using syntax to extract the meaning of sentences irrespective of the number of propositions the sentence contained. Conversely, rCBF increased in more posterior sites when participants were required to make plausibility judgments (they had to determine if a given sentence was plausible) when sentences contained two versus one proposition. These findings provide support for the hypothesis that different aspects of language processing are carried out by different neural mechanisms. However, this evidence does not preclude the possibility that a more general attentional resource mechanism might be necessary to coordinate activity among these different neural pathways, particularly when the total processing load is high or when the task must be carried out under time pressure.

For now, the debate between whether a single or multiple system of working memory resources is needed to support the variety of processes involved in language comprehension remains to be settled. Nevertheless, as we continue to discuss in the chapters to come, neuroimaging techniques offer powerful new tools for exploring these and other theoretical issues pertaining to auditory processing. In particular, we discuss many examples of the way neuroimaging techniques (i.e., functional magnetic resonance imaging [fMRI] and PET scans) are being used to inform and resolve other important theoretical issues pertaining to language comprehension in further chapters. Many of these issues involve the underlying working memory resource requirements of processing different types of words and sentences.

Despite the close relationship between the concepts of working memory resources and mental workload, few investigations and models have specifically incorporated both within the context of the same study. Investigations of working memory and mental workload are generally carried out by scientists in the fields of cognitive psychology and human factors, respectively, with discouragingly few attempts to integrate findings. This gap may be bridged in the near future as both cognitive psychologists and human factors scientists focus increasing attention on the brain mechanisms involved in mental activity. Scientists focusing on an exciting new area within human factors, termed *neuroergonomics *(see Parasuraman, 2003; Parasuraman & Rizzo, 2007) are leading the way in this endeavor. However, for now we turn our focus to key concepts and models essential to the assessment of mental workload.
## **MENTAL WORKLOAD: KEY CONSTRUCTS **

As previously discussed, mental workload is a multidimensional, multifaceted construct (Gopher & Donchin, 1986). Therefore, it is logical to assume that different assessment techniques may be sensitive to different aspects of workload demand. This further suggests that finding one ideal assessment technique is challenging at best and potentially an impossible feat. There are many sources of variation in workload demand, some of which are directly linked to the task of interest and others that are unique to the person or operator performing the task. Complicating this issue is the fact that workload demand may fluctuate rapidly over time. It may be apparent that the demands of a given task change over time and with changes in the operator’s experience and skill at the task. Less apparent is that workload may also fluctuate as a function of things such as the operator’s strategy and physiological state. In addition, workload may vary as a function of an individual’s response to task demands and personal characteristics (Parasuraman & Hancock, 2001). These multifaceted aspects of workload can affect demand singly and in combination, thus providing a continual challenge to workload assessment.

Due to the multidimensional influences, dissociation may occur between the demands of the task and observable human performance. This may be referred to as the underload/overload issue. As a task becomes less demanding, performance may deteriorate. People have a tendency to mentally disengage from a task that is not challenging. Conversely, if a task of relatively low demand becomes more difficult, performance may actually improve as operators focus attention and engage more resources toward task performance. The operators’ strategies, skill level, and physical abilities may have dramatic affects on behavioral performance measures. These aspects of assessment are particularly important to keep in mind when attempting to assess the mental workload of auditory processing tasks. For example, in many situations speech processing is highly robust, with low resource demand. Understanding speech may seem so automatic that in some everyday situations listeners may devote little focused attention to the task. (Many college freshmen may mistakenly believe they can adequately pay attention to their professors while also listening to their classmate or perhaps their iPod. The error in this line of reasoning may not become apparent until they perform poorly on the first exam.) Even listeners with compromised abilities, such as people with hearing impairment, may have developed wellpracticed compensation strategies that allow them to maintain performance in many everyday listening situations. However, recall our opening example of the child learning arithmetic; performance measures alone may reveal little about the effort involved in the task of processing the auditory material. This is particularly true if there is ample time for performing the given task, a topic we turn to next.
## **Time **

Time can be both a limiting factor on performance (there is only so much one can do within a given period of time) and a stressor when the demands of the task seem too great for the amount of time available. Therefore, time plays an important role in mental workload whether or not it directly or indirectly affects working memory processes. Several models of mental workload have included time pressure as a major component (Hancock & Caird, 1993; Hancock & Chignell, 1988; Young & Stanton, 2002). For example, Hancock and Chignell (1988) discussed how the perceived time to complete a task interacts with the perceived distance from task completion. As illustrated in Figure 5.1 , excessive mental workload can result from either not having enough time to complete the task at hand or from having an extremely high number of tasks to complete within a given time.

**FIGURE 5.1 **Mental workload and performance.

The influence of time pressure has been incorporated in a number of subjective mental workload assessment techniques. Another factor affecting mental workload that has been more difficult to incorporate in assessment methods involves the moods, interests, and fatigue level of the person or operator performing the task.
### **Operator State and Strategies **

Operator characteristics (such as a person’s mood or fatigue level) also have an impact on workload. To illustrate the influence of these endogenous factors, perhaps everyone can imagine a time when they were performing an everyday task (such as listening to a friend recite the events of the day) and the task seemed more difficult because they were tired, preoccupied, or found the material uninteresting. Despite the low level of resource demand or difficulty inherent in the particular task, one may experience a high level of workload and find it difficult to or be unable to adequately engage sufficient mental resources to attend, comprehend, and respond to the speaker’s dialogue. Conversely, when highly motivated and well rested (or when the topic becomes more interesting), the same task may be “easier” to perform.

In work situations, as task load increases, operators may adopt adaptive control strategies to offset performance consequences and to maintain workload within a manageable range (Cnossen, Rothengatter, & Meijman, 2000; Hockey, 1997). Operators may change their performance criteria, offset tasks to other personnel, or engage automation systems to allocate attention to critical task components. Task management strategies include prioritizing and scheduling multiple overlapping tasks and are critical to effective performance in many hazardous occupations (Chou, Madhavan, & Funk, 1996). Unfortunately, empirical evidence indicates that during periods of high mental workload in various critical work environments (i.e., operating rooms and aircraft cockpits), less attention may be focused on the communication task, resulting in shorter utterances, reduced knowledge and background information sharing, and high risk for communication failure (Grommes & Dietrich, 2002). Errors in task management can result in catastrophic consequences, as evidenced by their involvement in a substantial proportion of aviation accidents and incidents (Chou et al., 1996). The relationship between workload and performance may change as a result of prior task demand as well. This relationship has been incorporated into Young and Stanton’s (2002) model of mental workload, which is discussed further in this chapter.
### **Compensatory Strategies **

As the mental demands of a task or set of tasks increase, people tend to use compensatory strategies to maintain performance. An early example is the research of Sperandio (1978), who found that air traffic controllers handled the load of an increase in the number of aircraft they had to control by shortening the amount of time they talked to the pilots of the aircraft, while attempting to convey information essential to maintenance of safety. It has also been well documented that older, hearing-impaired listeners will use contextual cues as a compensatory strategy to maintain speech comprehension and communication (Gordon-Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1997; Madden, 1988; Speranza, Daneman, & Schneider, 2000). Similar performance benefits for older adults are observed when context is added to visually degraded sentences (Speranza et al., 2000). However, these compensatory strategies require mental resource expenditure. Thus, despite their potential to preserve communication, the use of compensatory strategies may compromise performance on other concurrent tasks. Alternatively, in resource-demanding situations older adults may lack sufficient spare resource capacity to make use of compensatory strategies. This is more likely when speech is particularly degraded, in the presence of noise, or when presentation rates are high. The additional demands of processing speech may also lead to the use of compensatory strategies for a concurrent task. This may involve engaging automation to assist in monitoring or performing a task that the operator would normally perform to allow communication to take place. In the case of driving an automobile, the driver may choose compensatory strategies in an attempt to offset the additional resource demands of talking on a cellular phone. Unfortunately, these compensatory strategies are frequently not as effective as their users believe.

For example, many drivers will attempt to use compensatory strategies to maintain safe driving while conversing on a cellular phone. There is now considerable evidence that cellular phone conversations increase drivers’ mental workload (Haigney et al., 2000; McCarley et al., 2004; Strayer et al., 2003; Strayer & Johnston, 2001). Drivers use a number of compensatory strategies in an attempt to maintain driving performance within safe margins; however, empirical evidence suggests that these strategies may not effectively decrease risk (Haigney et al., 2000). For example, drivers tend to decrease speed when using a mobile phone. However, in simulation studies decreased speed did not result in fewer lane deviations or off-road instances. These findings suggest that drivers may be more confident in their compensation strategies than actual performance would indicate.

Hands-free mobile phones do little to offset the increased demands of communicating while driving (McCarley et al., 2004; Patten, Kircher, Ostlund, & Nilsson, 2004). Research has consistently demonstrated that it is the mental complexity of the conversation (Patten et al., 2004; Strayer & Johnston, 2001) and perhaps the quality of the acoustic signal (Matthews, Legg, & Charlton, 2003) rather than the response characteristics of phone use that represent the greatest hazard to safe driving.

As this driving example illustrates, there are many situations for which understanding the mental workload demands of an auditory task can have important safety consequences. Humans frequently process speech and other auditory information while engaged in other important tasks. We turn now to a discussion of the major methods and techniques that have been developed to assess mental workload.
## **MENTAL WORKLOAD ASSESSMENT **

Numerous investigations have compared methods of assessing mental workload (Baldwin & Coyne, 2005; Baldwin, Freeman, & Coyne, 2004; Brown, 1965; Casali & Wierwille, 1983a, 1984; Verwey & Veltman, 1996; Wierwille & Connor, 1983),

and numerous reviews and discussions have been compiled (Baldwin & Coyne, 2005; Casali & Wierwille, 1983a; Eggemeier, Wilson, Kramer, & Damos, 1991; Gopher & Donchin, 1986; Hancock & Desmond, 2001; Knowles, 1963; Moray, 1982; O’Donnell & Eggemeier, 1986; Verwey & Veltman, 1996). At present, no single method appears optimal in all situations; in fact, different techniques may be required simultaneously to assess different aspects of mental workload (Baldwin & Coyne, 2005; Isreal, Chesney, Wickens, & Donchin, 1980; Veltman, 2003). The consensus seems to be that the best assessment methodology depends on the goal of the assessment and the particular operational environment in which the assessment will take place. Three primary categories of workload assessment have been identified, and each of these is discussed.

The three major categories of workload assessment techniques that have been identified in previous literature (O’Donnell & Eggemeier, 1986; Wierwille & Eggemeier, 1993): (a) behavioral measures, which can be further divided into the subcategories of primary measures and secondary task performance measures obtained in a dualtask paradigm; (b) physiological measures (including but not limited to neuroergonomic indices of brain activity); and (c) subjective measures. Considerable debate has ensued concerning the best method of assessment, with benefits and limitations identified for each depending in large part on the intended purpose of measurement, the tasks involved, and the environment in which measurement is taking place. Many of the limitations as well as the benefits associated with each measurement technique are reviewed in the discussion that follows, with an emphasis on issues particularly relevant to assessing the mental workload of auditory processing tasks. Benefits and limitations are discussed in terms of two primary issues involved in assessment: sensitivity and intrusion (O’Donnell & Eggemeier, 1986).
### **Sensitivity and Intrusion **

*Sensitivity *refers to the ability of the assessment technique to detect changes in workload requirements imposed by the task under consideration. A technique that fails to detect or reveal workload fluctuations can be said to lack sensitivity. Keep in mind that a particular technique may reflect changes in (be sensitive to) some aspects of workload demand while failing to detect other aspects.

*Intrusion *refers to the degree to which the assessment technique itself interferes with performance of the task (or set of tasks) under investigation. Assessment techniques are sought that are sensitive to changes in workload fluctuations without interfering with task performance. We begin by discussing behavioral task assessment methodologies.
### **Behavioral Task Measures **

Behavioral task measures assess workload by examining performance that can be observed. This commonly involves measures such as accuracy, response time (RT), and task completion. Two primary distinctions can be made within the category of behavioral measures. The first is primary task measures, and the second is dual-task or secondary task measures.
#### **Primary Task Measures **

Primary task measures involve assessing the task of interest directly. One simply examines performance on the task at hand. This method is certainly the most direct. However, as previously discussed, task demands may change considerably without concomitant changes in observable performance. Conversely, decrements in performance may occur when task demands are too low. Thus, primary task measures, in and of themselves, seldom reflect operator load (Knowles, 1963; O’Donnell & Eggemeier, 1986; Ogden et al., 1979). In other words, primary task measures may assess how well an operator can perform a certain task, but they provide little or no indication of the amount of effort expended by the operator.

A critical limitation of primary task measures is their lack of sensitivity to increased demands until the operator is overloaded (Eggemeier, 1988). In other words, primary task measures may fail to reflect the increased expenditure associated with increasing task difficulty until the operator has reached the edge of his or her operating envelope. The operating envelope can be thought of as the range of resource capacity available for performing a task. A person’s operating envelope will vary according to previously mentioned factors, such as skill, ability, and physiological state. When people have reached the edge of their operating envelope, they have exhausted their reserve capacity of resources. Further increases in task demand will thus result in the operator being “overloaded,” at which time a sudden drop in performance is detectable. In mental workload assessment, measures that are sensitive to small increases in task demand (prior to resource capacity exhaustion) are necessitated. A method of addressing the lack of sensitivity issue with behavioral measures that has been exceedingly popular in the history of mental workload research is the dual-task paradigm.
#### **Secondary Task Measures **

Secondary task measures resulting from implementation of a dual-task paradigm have proven more sensitive to workload fluctuations than primary task measures alone. The theoretical foundation for the dual-task paradigm is the premise that humans have a limited supply of mental resources that can be engaged to meet task demands. Spare mental capacity, then, is the difference between this upper limit and the amount required to perform the task or tasks under investigation. The task of interest (i.e., driving, flying, or comprehending a spoken passage) is designated as the primary task. People are instructed to perform the primary task to the best of their ability. Another task (called the secondary task) that is less important or completely unrelated to the primary task is then used as an index of the spare or reserve resource capacity. The idea is that when a person strives to maintain his or her performance on a primary task, if that task becomes more resource demanding, then fewer resources will be available for performing the secondary task, and thus performance on the secondary task will degrade (Knowles, 1963). If the operator is able to perform well on the secondary task, this is taken to indicate that the primary task is of relatively low resource demand. Conversely, if a person is unable to perform the secondary task and at the same time maintain primary task performance, this is taken to indicate that the primary task is more demanding. The secondary task technique has demonstrated sensitivity to changes in the resource demands of a wide variety of tasks, ranging from driving (Brown & Poulton, 1961; Harms, 1991) to sentence processing (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002). Secondary task measures can also be sensitive to individual differences in resource capacity and fluctuating levels of workload.

For example, suppose that Bob performs a given task easily, but it is so difficult for the second person, John, that it takes up nearly all his processing resources, leaving him little or no spare capacity. Now, suppose Bob and John are given another task to perform concurrently and are asked to maintain their performance on the first task, performing the second only to the extent that they may do so without compromising their performance on the first. Bob, who is utilizing fewer resources to perform the first task, has greater spare capacity to devote to the second task and therefore will be able to perform both tasks (providing the second is not too difficult) with relative skill. However, John, who is struggling with the first task, will have few if any spare resources to devote to performing the secondary task. Therefore, John will likely take longer to respond to and make more errors on the secondary task. Stemming from this premise, the dual-task paradigm is a well-established workload assessment technique that involves having the operator perform a second task concurrent with the task of interest. Performance on the secondary task is used as an index of the mental demand imposed by the first or primary task. There are several variations of the basic dual-task paradigm, including the use of loading tasks and adaptive secondary tasks. Discussion of these variations is beyond the scope of our current aim. The interested reader is referred to previous reviews (Knowles, 1963; Ogden et al., 1979; Williges & Wierwille, 1979).
### **Physiological Measures **

The theoretical foundation of physiological measures of mental workload lies in the assumption that mental effort is accompanied by physiological changes in the individual engaged in the task. For example, researchers make the assumption that exerting greater mental effort will be associated with greater brain activation (Mason, Just, Keller, & Carpenter, 2003). Numerous researchers have advocated the measurement of physiological and neurophysiological changes as indices of mental workload (Just et al., 2003; Kahneman, Tursky, Shapiro, & Crider, 1969; Kramer, 1991; Parasuraman, 2003). Examples of physiological measures of workload include heart rate and heart rate variability, blood pressure, eye blinks, pupil diameter, skin conductance, and many more. Examples of neurophysiological methods that have been used to examine resource expenditure include electroencephalography (EEG) and ERP components, fMRI, and PET scans. While ERP measures can provide a means of examining the time course of different auditory processing stages, brain imaging techniques such as fMRI and PET can provide a powerful tool for examining the region of brain activity and level of brain activation engaged in relation to tasks with different resource requirements. Reviews of some of this work may be found in several resources (Byrne & Parasuraman, 1996; Caplan & Waters, 1999; Gevins et al., 1995; Gopher & Donchin, 1986; Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, et al., 1996; Kramer, 1991; Wickens, 1990; Wierwille, 1979; Wierwille & Connor, 1983; Wilson & Eggemeier, 1991).

Physiological measurement techniques offer several advantages relative to other forms of assessment. They are objective and, unlike the secondary task techniques discussed previously, physiological measures frequently require no additional overt response or learning on the part of the participant (Isreal, Chesney, et al., 1980). Also, physiological measures may be sensitive to aspects of the task that are not revealed by other forms of assessment. For example, several investigations have found ERP components to be sensitive to increased demands associated with task parameters not demonstrated through performance measures such as RT and accuracy (Baldwin et al., 2004; Kramer et al., 1987). For a helpful discussion on the dissociation between ERP measures and behavioral performance, see the work of Wickens (1990).
#### **Neurophysiological Techniques **

Measures of brain function in particular have several advantages over alternative measurement techniques. These advantages include increased sensitivity to both transient and continuous fluctuations in mental demand without the need to introduce an additional task as well as the ability to discern the relative contributions of various brain mechanisms as a result of task dynamics. The ability of neurophysiological measures to provide real-time assessment of mental workload can facilitate both examination of task components and environmental variables leading to compromised performance as well as the potential to develop adaptive automation interfaces to offset workload in high-demand situations.

Neurophysiological techniques vary along several dimensions, including (a) level of invasiveness, (b) spatial resolution capabilities, and (c) temporal resolution capabilities. EEG/ERP methods are relatively low in level of invasiveness and have strong temporal resolution capabilities. However, EEG/ERP methods lack strong spatial resolution capabilities. Conversely, PET scans and fMRI, which have strong spatial resolution capabilities, are highly invasive (lacking portability, which makes them unsuitable for assessing performance in dynamic complex environments). Further, PET scans and fMRI methods lack the temporal resolution capabilities suitable for assessing workload for real-time applications. An additional concern is that scanner equipment required for fMRI is extremely noisy, limiting its use in examining many auditory processing paradigms. Emerging optical brain imaging systems, such as NIRS, offer the combined advantage of low levels of invasiveness, strong temporal resolution, and relatively strong spatial resolution as compared to EEG/ERP techniques. However, further testing is required to determine the suitability of implanting NIRS assessment techniques in complex environments. EEG/ERP techniques have been used extensively for mental workload assessment. We discuss further some applications of the examination of ERP components since this technique has been used extensively not only in mental workload assessment, but also specifically as a tool for investigating the resource requirements and time course of processing various aspects of complex sound.
#### **ERP Investigations **

The examination of changes in ERP components as a method of understanding human information processing and mental workload, in particular, has had a long history. The P300 ERP component, a positive wave deflection occurring approximately 300 ms after a stimulus event, has been of interest in mental workload assessment dating at least as far back as 1977, when Wickens and colleagues reported its use. The rationale for use of this endogenous component is based on the theory discussed previously that humans have a limited amount of processing resources (Kahneman, 1973; Wickens, 2002).

One of the commonly used paradigms, utilizing an oddball discrimination task, involves presenting two or more stimuli of varying probability. The higher-probability stimulus (e.g., a tone of a given frequency) serves as a distracter, while the infrequent oddball stimulus (e.g., a tone of a different frequency) serves as the target. Within the framework of a limited-capacity processing system, P300 amplitude in an oddball discrimination paradigm is thought to reflect the amount of available attentional resources that can be devoted to a given task or task set. As fewer attentional resources are available (due to the concurrent performance of a task that is increasing in difficulty), amplitude of the P300 response to the target stimuli in an oddball discrimination task can be expected to decrease.

An advantage of assessing workload with an oddball ERP paradigm is that no overt response is required (Baldwin et al., 2004; Isreal, Chesney, et al., 1980). The operator can simply be asked to keep a mental count of the number of targets. Or, in a variation of the oddball paradigm referred to as the irrelevant probe task, the operator can be instructed simply to ignore the irregular stimuli (Kramer, Trejo, & Humphrey, 1995). In an irrelevant probe paradigm, earlier components such as N100 or N200 (negative wave deflections occurring approximately 100 and 200 ms, respectively, after the onset of the stimulus) are typically examined.

ERP components have demonstrated sensitivity to changes in mental workload in a number of operational environments. For example, in an early investigation involving monitoring of a simulated ATC display, the P300 component stemming from an oddball discrimination task successfully differentiated between manipulations of display task demand (Isreal, Wickens, Chesney, & Donchin, 1980). Similarly, Kramer and colleagues found the P300 component to be sensitive to changes in flight task difficulty (Kramer et al., 1987). In a simulated driving environment, Baldwin and colleagues found P300 amplitude to be sensitive to the increased demands of driving in heavy fog versus clear visibility (Baldwin & Coyne, 2005).

In similar fashion, Kramer and colleagues found that N100 and N200 components associated with an irrelevant auditory probe task were sensitive to changes in the demands of a radar monitoring task (Kramer et al., 1995). Additional examples of the auditory probe technique are discussed in subsequent chapters. In particular, the use of ERP techniques for examination of various aspects of speech processing is discussed in Chapter 8 .

Despite the stated advantages and demonstrated usefulness of physiological measures, they are not without their disadvantages. They may require extensive equipment costs and training on the part of the experimenter. In addition, the logistics of equipment use pose a challenge to the use of some physiological measures in complex real-world environments (Gevins et al., 1995). Partially in an effort to overcome some of these logistic difficulties, experimenters have often chosen to rely on subjective assessments of mental workload.
#### **Subjective Techniques **

Subjective techniques have been utilized extensively as a tool for assessing mental workload (Brookhuis & de Waard, 2001; Lee et al., 2001; Meshkati, Hancock, Rahimi, & Dawes, 1995; Srinivasan & Jovanis, 1997a; Vidulich & Wickens, 1986). They are generally easy to administer and require relatively little preparation or learning by the experimenter or operator. A number of scales have been developed, and their psychometric properties have been compared in numerous investigations (Hendy, Hamilton, & Landry, 1993; Hill et al., 1992; Rubio, Diaz, Martin, & Puente, 2004; Tsang & Velazquez, 1996). One of the most widely used subjective workload scales in human factors research is the NASA Task Load Index (NASA TLX) developed by Hart and Staveland (1988). It has demonstrated sensitivity to changing workload demands in several investigations (Grier et al., 2003; Hill et al., 1992; Reagan & Baldwin, 2006).

Subjective techniques have several advantages, including ease of administration, low cost, and face validity. However, several limitations are also prevalent. For example, as pointed out by Willigies and Wierwille (1979) in an early review, in many cases subjective workload measures are situation specific and may fail to take into account adaptivity, learning, experience, natural ability, and changes in emotional state on the part of the operator. In addition, they pointed out that subjective measures can confuse measurement of mental workload with physical workload.

Vidulich (1988) reviewed several experiments investigating the sensitivity of subjective assessment techniques. In one of his previous studies (Vidulich & Tsang, 1986), a Sternberg memory search task was paired with a secondary task of compensatory tracking. A measure of RT was demonstrated to be sensitive to changes in task difficulty in both single- and dual-task conditions. However, two subjective assessment measures (both were bipolar rating scales) failed to provide a sensitive measure of task difficulty in the dual-task condition. Vidulich (1988) proposed that the presence of the tracking task apparently overwhelmed the subjective distinction between memory search task difficulty levels. Vidulich also noted that the measure of root mean square (RMS) tracking error remained consistent across memory task difficulty conditions.

In a second experiment, involving a tracking task paired with a simple transformation task, Vidulich compared the subjective workload assessment technique (SWAT) and NASA bipolar technique (Vidulich & Tsang, 1986). The two subjective techniques resulted in significantly different scores on one of the conditions. In addition, the findings suggested that both subjective techniques were sensitive to manipulations that influenced perceptual/central processing demands but failed to discriminate between manipulations that influenced response execution demands.

A general lack of sensitivity on the part of subjective methods has been frequently reported in the workload literature. Subjective ratings frequently are sensitive to the increased demands associated with the introduction of an additional task but may fail to indicate when one of the two tasks becomes more demanding (Baldwin & Coyne, 2003, 2005; Baldwin et al., 2004).
## **SUMMARY **

Mental workload is an important construct in human factors research. It also shares many commonalities with concepts used in other disciplines, namely that of working memory resources as used predominantly in the fields of cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Common themes include the observation that there are limits to the amount of mental effort people have available to perform tasks. Individual differences exist in these capacity limits and will affect performance accordingly. Further, the structure of the tasks being performed (i.e., whether they are primarily visual-spatial or auditory-verbal in nature) will also affect one’s ability to perform two tasks at the same time.

Mental workload can be measured in a variety of ways, each having distinct advantages and limitations. The choice of which to use should be driven by the questions to be answered and the constraints of the environment in which workload is to be assessed. Subjective measures are one of the easiest methods to implement but are often insensitive to fluctuating levels of workload found in many tasks. Behavioral measures, particularly within a dual-task paradigm, have led to important theoretical developments and remain a useful assessment technique. Increasingly, however, both human factors practitioners and cognitive psychologists are turning to methods of examining brain function in conjunction with behavioral measures to answer longstanding theoretical questions.
## **CONCLUDING REMARKS **

Regardless of how it is measured, determining the level of mental effort involved in performing various and simultaneous tasks is an important issue and is a major focus of the remaining chapters in this book. Examining the mental workload involved in auditory processing tasks can inform auditory display design, improve communication, and facilitate improved experimental designs in a wide number of disciplines. One area in which consideration of the mental workload of the auditory task is particularly critical is when using auditory tasks in cognitive research. Unfortunately, as discussed in the next chapter, all too frequently this consideration is not given ample attention.