# Unknown Chapter

*Source: Auditory Cognition and Human Performance by C. L. Baldwin (2012)*

---

# 10 **Auditory Processing and the Older Adult **

## **INTRODUCTION **

Older adults often say they have difficulty understanding speech even though they may say they can hear it. Does this difficulty come from changes in hearing abilities or cognitive skills? Thus far, the chapters in this book have discussed various aspects of auditory cognition as they apply to the performance of healthy young adults with normal hearing. In this chapter, the same auditory processes are examined, but now the emphasis is placed on one group in particular—older adults.

There are many reasons for such a focus on the older adult. A general but important rationale is that the population as a whole is aging, in both the United States and worldwide, so there are many more people over the age of 60 than ever before, with the numbers projected to rise rapidly over the next several decades. Auditory processing plays an essential role in many social and economic areas. Mandatory retirement policies are being revised in many countries, and retirement ages are also increasing, resulting in many more adults over the age of 60 remaining in the workforce. Older adults are prone to auditory-processing difficulties, so understanding the nature of such difficulties and how to mitigate them are important issues. The topic takes on added importance given that, irrespective of retirement policies, increasing numbers of older adults are choosing for economic reasons to remain in the workforce rather than retire. It is understood that for these older workers to be productive and be financially able to support themselves late in life, they will need to pay attention not only to their physical health, but also to their cognitive functioning, including their auditory cognitive abilities.
## **AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN AUDITORY PROCESSING **

Older adults often report difficulties understanding speech and other forms of complex auditory information (Fozard & Gordon-Salant, 2001; Schneider, Daneman, Murphy, & See, 2000; Schneider, Daneman, & Pichora-Fuller, 2002; WGSUA, 1988). Some may report that their hearing is fine. They can hear conversations, they just do not understand them. Since speech communication is such an essential part of daily functioning in many everyday tasks and is often critical to success in both social and occupational situations, age-related hearing difficulties are of global concern. Communication in noisy or reverberant environments and processing synthetic, compressed, or rapid speech—common in many modern interfaces—poses a particular challenge for the older adult. As a result of decreasing speech-processing abilities, older adults may experience anxiety, frustration, and the tendency to withdraw or be excluded from social interactions at home and work. Compounding the problem is that others may use a simplified form of speech with older adults, referred to as *elderspeak *(Caporael, 1981), which is comparable to baby talk—often grossly oversimplified relative to the cognitive capabilities of the older listener.

Given these factors, it is not surprising that hearing impairment among older adults is associated with increased rates of social isolation, depression, and cognitive dysfunction (see discussion in Frisina & Frisina, 1997). Whether hearing impairment plays a causal role or is an exacerbating factor in cognitive dysfunction is a matter of debate. But, it is clear that communication difficulties cause distress to many older adults.

Older adults are also more likely to miss important sounds in their everyday and working environments, such as warning sounds. For example, Slawinski and MacNeil (2002) observed that, compared to the young, older listeners required higher intensities (an average of 10 dB higher) to detect warnings (car horns and police sirens), both with and without the presence of background noise. Older adults with a history of occupational or recreational noise exposure are particularly at risk of missing these critical signals. Taking into consideration the capabilities of older adults is recognized as an important aspect of auditory in-vehicle display design (Baldwin, 2002). Fortunately, the design changes that decrease the mental workload of auditory processing for older adults generally also improve performance among their younger counterparts.

It is important to understand the interaction of sensory/peripheral factors with higher-order cognitive factors in contributing to the speech-processing difficulties of older adults. Such an understanding can assist in facilitating improvements in the productivity and overall quality of life for this fast-growing segment of the population (Arlinger, Lunner, Lyxell, & Pichora-Fuller, 2009; Baldwin, 2002; Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002; Schneider et al., 2002). This chapter discusses key theoretical issues, topics of debate, and empirical investigations aimed at understanding this complex issue.
### **Perceptual/Cognitive Contributions **

Age-related changes occur in both hearing abilities (Corso, 1963a, 1963b; Fozard, 1990; Schieber & Baldwin, 1996; Schneider & Pichora-Fuller, 2000) and cognitive processes such as attention, working memory capacity, verbal recall, and speed of processing (Anderson et al., 1998; Blumenthal & Madden, 1988; Craik, 1977; Kemper, 2006; Lindenberger & Baltes, 1994; Park & Payer, 2006; Waters & Caplan, 2001). A growing body of evidence has documented the existence of strong associations between sensory and cognitive processing abilities (Baldwin & Ash, 2010; Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002; Lindenberger & Baltes, 1994, 1997; McCoy et al., 2005; Pichora-Fuller, Schneider, & Daneman, 1995; Rabbitt, 1968; Schneider et al., 2002; Scialfa, 2002; Tun, McCoy, & Wingfield, 2009), further complicating our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for age-related changes in speechprocessing and general cognitive abilities (see reviews in Burke & Shafto, 2008; Schneider, Pichora-Fuller, & Daneman, 2010).

Given the age-related changes to both sensory and cognitive processes, it is remarkable that older adults maintain their speech understanding capabilities as long as they do (Wingfield & Grossman, 2006). However, mounting evidence indicates that maintenance of speech understanding stems from increased reliance on topdown processing mechanisms (Baldwin & Ash, 2010; Tun et al., 2009). In turn, the increased reliance on top-down processing requires more mental resources than bottom-up sensory processes, and therefore it can be expected that these compensatory processes will come at the cost of other capabilities (i.e., investing resources into remembering complex discourse and other higher-level processes). Factors such as multiple competing sources of sound, background noise, and reverberation exacerbate the hearing difficulties of older adults (Gordon-Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1995b; Hargus & Gordon-Salant, 1995; Tun, 1998; Tun, O’Kane, & Wingfield, 2002). Fortunately, a number of things can be done to improve the auditory-processing performance of older adults. This chapter examines the performance gains that may be achieved by providing structural support to older listeners, such as contextual cues, improved signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios, and direct visual contact with the speaker.

Throughout this discussion, particular attention is paid to understanding the relative contribution of peripheral versus central age-related changes and their relative impact on auditory information processing (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002; Schneider et al., 2002). First, an overview of some of the age-related changes that occur to the auditory system is presented, followed by a discussion of how these changes have an impact on hearing acuity. Next, major theories of age-related changes in higher-order cognitive processes are presented, followed by a discussion of how these processes interact to affect the mental effort older adults must exert in auditory-processing tasks.
## **AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN HEARING **

A wide range of changes in sensory functioning accompanies advanced age (see Fozard, 1990; Fozard & Gordon-Salant, 2001; Kline & Scialfa, 1997; Schieber & Baldwin, 1996). Most of these age-related sensory changes occur gradually, potentially leaving the older adult unaware of the extent of his or her impairment. For example, Rabbitt (1991a) found that older participants tended to self-report high levels of visual abilities, and that these self-reports showed little correlation to actual measures of visual acuity. Gradual hearing loss is also likely to go unnoticed or be underestimated, at least initially.

In addition to normal age-related changes, the incidence of pathological conditions leading to rapid deterioration of sensory and cognitive processes also increases with age. Fundamental age-related changes in audition are briefly reviewed here. More indepth discussion of age-related changes in both visual and auditory functioning can be found in a number of reviews (see Fozard, 1990; Fozard & Gordon-Salant, 2001; Gates, Cooper, Kannel, & Miller, 1990; Kline & Scialfa, 1997; Schieber & Baldwin, 1996).
### **Presbycusis **

Age-related decline in hearing acuity, called *presbyacousia *, or more commonly *presbycusis *(Corso, 1963b), is a well-documented aspect of the normal aging process (Corso, 1963b; Etholm & Belal, 1974). Presbycusis likely results from age-related degeneration of anatomical structures supporting hearing. However, there are considerable individual differences in such changes, and some, such as degeneration of the middle ear joints, appear to have little impact on sound transmission (Etholm & Belal, 1974). Common disorders among older listeners include eczema of the auditory canal, atrophic scars, thickening and immobility of the tympanic membrane, the presence of excessive cerumen (earwax), and loss of transparency and retraction (medial displacement) of the tympanic membrane (Corso, 1963b). Note that retraction also occurs whenever the pressure changes abruptly between the ambient pressure and the middle ear side of the tympanic membrane, such as during the sudden decrease in altitude experienced during air travel. The normal tympanic membrane is transparent. Loss of transparency of the tympanic membrane is common among children with otitis media (a bacterial infection of the middle ear); however, in younger people this condition generally clears up within a few months. Among older adults, the condition is persistent.

At least four types of presbycusis have been identified (see review by Schieber & Baldwin, 1996). A major contributing factor in presbycusis is thought to be loss of hair cells in the inner ear (see discussions in Corso, 1981; Olsho, Harkins, & Lenhardt, 1985). A possible genetic link for presbycusis has been suggested. 1 The application of molecular biological, genomic, and proteomic techniques to improve understanding of the auditory system is a relatively new but emerging area of research that holds great promise for understanding inherited causes of deafness (Jamesdaniel, Salvi, & Coling, 2009).

In addition to these peripheral age-related changes in hearing abilities, considerable evidence indicates that advanced age is also associated with changes to more central auditory mechanisms.
#### **Central Presbycusis **

Age-related degenerative changes to central auditory pathways are classified under the rubric central presbycusis. The listening problems experienced by older adults are often greater than would be expected based on peripheral hearing assessments and are greater than in younger adults with similarly elevated pure-tone thresholds (Frisina & Frisina, 1997). Plomp and Mimpen (1979) noted that speech reception thresholds (SRTs) in noise are often worse for older listeners than would be predicted on the basis of SRTs obtained in quiet conditions. These findings indicate that reductions in central auditory-processing abilities, common among older listeners, also play a significant role in age-related changes in speech processing in addition to peripheral problems (Bellis, 2002; Frisina & Frisina, 1997).

Frisina and Frisina (1997) found that older adults with good cognitive function could make use of contextual cues as well as or better than their younger counterparts to overcome the adverse affects of peripheral impairments in a speech-processing task. In support of this, Lunner (2003) observed a strong association between speech recognition in noise and working memory, indicating that individuals with higher working memory span scores were better at compensating for the negative impact of noise.

However, even after controlling for audibility and cognitive functioning, many investigations indicated that older listeners may still experience greater difficulty processing speech in noise, relative to in quiet (Frisina & Frisina, 1997; Plomp & Mimpen, 1979). This suggests that central processing issues, such as temporal resolution, may play a fundamental role in age-related communication difficulties.

Despite the attention that has been placed on age-related changes in auditory processing, the relative contribution of peripheral versus central mechanisms in accounting for these changes is still unclear. This issue is discussed in more detail in subsequent sections. First, however, we turn attention toward common age-related hearing difficulties. The hearing difficulties of older adults can be attributed to changes in peripheral, central pathways and normal cognitive changes that accompany advanced age. These causal factors tend to overlap, making their independent contribution difficult to ascertain. For ease of exposition, these factors are discussed individually.
### **Pure-Tone Threshold Elevation **

Hearing loss is one of the most prevalent disabling chronic conditions in adults over age 60. Of this age group, 41% report hearing difficulties (Gates et al., 1990), and the prevalence of difficulties increases with advanced age. Sensorineural hearing loss results in increased pure-tone thresholds, difficulties in speech perception, and greater susceptibility to the adverse effects of environmental factors such as noise and reverberation (Jenstad & Souza, 2007). Age-related decreases in hearing acuity are prevalent first at high frequencies—important for speech perception—and then progressively spread to lower frequencies (Brant & Fozard, 1990; Corso, 1963b). Early investigations (Corso, 1963b) revealed that men typically begin experiencing hearing loss at an earlier age than women (32 vs. 37 years) and have greater high-frequency loss. At the time, this finding was attributed to the likelihood that males have higher exposure to occupational noise than females. More recent research indicated that this differential pattern of hearing loss continues to be observed, with males exhibiting greater and more rapid loss than females at most ages and frequencies; the greater hearing loss of males occurs even for those working in low-noise occupations and in the absence of evidence of noise-induced hearing loss (Pearson et al., 1995). Noise exposure does not appear to have as significant an impact on rate of hearing loss as previously thought (Lee, Matthews, Dubno, & Mills, 2005).

Once presbycusis strikes women, it may progress at a faster rate, at least at some frequencies. Corso (1963b) found that between 51 and 57 years of age, women’s lower-frequency thresholds tended to be higher than men’s. More recent longitudinal studies (Lee et al., 2005) have found that females’ threshold increase at 1 kHz tends to be slower than males’, but that their rate of threshold increase from 6 to 12 kHz is significantly faster than males. Irrespective of absolute pure-tone thresholds, on average males’ word recognition abilities are lower and decline more rapidly than females’ in old age (Gates et al., 1990). The greater word recognition difficulties that males experience are thought to be related to marked high-frequency hearing loss (Amos & Humes, 2007; Gates et al., 1990).

As illustrated in Figure 10.1 , hearing loss increases with age. On average, people in their 60s have pure-tone detection thresholds that are about 13 dB higher than those of people in their 20s (Corso, 1963a). Note that this decrease in sensory acuity, though substantial, does not generally meet the criteria for a diagnosis of hearing impairment. Mild hearing loss is defined as a hearing level (HL) of 25–40 dB averaged across frequencies.* Therefore, in addition to the high incidence of clinical hearing loss among older adults, the incidence of “normal” or subclinical threshold elevation is virtually ubiquitous. The important performance effects of these subclinical age-related changes have come under empirical scrutiny (Baldwin, 2001, 2007; Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002) and are discussed in a subsequent section.

On average, pure-tone thresholds across the 0.25 to 12 kHz range increase by an average of 1 dB per year from age 60 on (Lee et al., 2005). Brant and Fozard (1990) pointed out that, among males, threshold elevation in the primary speech frequencies (0.5–2.0 kHz) is much lower, at about 0.3–0.4 dB per year through age 60 years, but then elevation rates in those frequencies accelerate to reach an increase of between 1.2 and 1.4 dB per year between the ages of 80 and 95 years. It is commonly known that the frequency range between 0.5 and 2.0 kHz is essential for speech perception. However, higher frequencies also play a vital role in speech intelligibility, particularly for distinguishing between consonants such as *f, s, th *, and *k *(Botwinick, 1984; Villaume, Brown, & Darling, 1994). The incidence and extent of this type of hearing impairment is particularly high for some groups of older adults who have experienced high degrees of occupational noise exposure, such as older pilots (Beringer, Harris, & Joseph, 1998). Decreased ability to hear high frequencies can also impair older persons’ ability to hear critical auditory cues, such as aircraft alarms.

Along with declining pure-tone sensory acuity, a number of changes occur in more central auditory-processing centers that can compound the effects of elevated thresholds and further compromise auditory processing in older adults.
### **Central Auditory-Processing Changes **

An increasing number of older adults experience auditory-processing disorders (APDs) stemming from damage or degeneration of central auditory pathways (Golding, Carter, Mitchell, & Hood, 2004). An APD or central auditory-processing disorders (CAPDs) may be present despite evidence of normal hearing sensitivity thresholds. An ADP can occur at any age, but its prevalence increases with advanced age (Golding et al., 2004). Incidence rate estimates generated from large-scale population studies for older adults varied considerably, from as low as 22.6% (Cooper

* For a detailed description of audiometric testing procedures and classifications, refer to publications and standards of the ASHA and Lloyd and Kaplan (Lloyd & Kaplan, 1978). & Gates, 1991) to over 76% (Golding et al., 2004). An APD is characterized by a discrepancy between audiometric test results and speech-processing abilities and may be present with or without concomitant hearing loss. An APD manifests itself differently in men and women, often striking men in their late 20s and women not until immediately after menopause (Bellis, 2002).

**FIGURE 10.1 **Hearing loss in decibels for (a) men and (b) women. (Adapted with permission from Corso, J. F. (1963b). Age and sex differences in pure-tone thresholds. *Archives of Otolaryngology, 77 *, 385–405.)
#### **Gender and Auditory-Processing Disorder **

In addition to the later onset of APD in women, there are generally gender differences in the way an APD manifests itself. In men, an APD is associated with greater difficulty hearing, particularly processing speech, in noise as well as greater difficulty understanding precisely *what *is being said (Bellis, 2002). An APD in women, on the other hand, tends to manifest itself in difficulties understanding how something is being said. For example, postmenopausal women with the sudden onset of an APD may find themselves having difficulty understanding the emotional content of messages; they may miss “the hidden meaning of conversations, and have difficulty appreciating the subtle aspects of humor and sarcasm” (Bellis, 2002, p. 151). Understanding the emotional content of spoken conversation relies on the right hemisphere to a greater extent than the left, and the APDs of postmenopausal women tend to be right hemisphere dysfunctions (Bellis & Wilber, 2001). The cause of these menopause-related changes requires further investigation. One explanation that is receiving increasing attention but remains controversial assigns a causal mechanism to the dramatic changes in hormone levels that accompany menopause.

There is some evidence that both hearing (Swanson & Dengerink, 1988) and cognitive (Maki & Resnick, 2001) abilities in young women fluctuate with the menstrual cycle, generally being less keen during the menstrual phase when estrogen levels are at their lowest. Among women in their 50s (who are generally in menopause), estrogen may play a neuroprotective role for both hearing and cognitive abilities (Duka, Tasker, & McGowan, 2000). Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has shown promise for offsetting a number of performance decrements on verbal- and auditory-processing measures, such as auditory oddball discrimination in an event-related potential (ERP) paradigm (Anderer et al., 2003, 2004), and surgical menopause without HRT is associated with decrements in these same kinds of auditory measures 3 and 6 months postoperation (Farrag, Khedr, Abdel-Aleem, & Rageh, 2002). At the same time, HRT consisting of both progestin in combination with estrogen has been linked to decrements in a number of auditory abilities, including increased (worse) pure-tone thresholds and decreased speech perception in noise. As Greenwood and Parasuraman (2012) pointed out, examining the impact of HRT on cognitive function is challenging since women who choose estrogen treatment are also generally better educated, younger, and healthier than those who do not. Further muddying the waters is the fact that investigations often use different types of hormones. For example, one large-scale clinical trial of high impact utilized an equine-derived (from horses rather than human) estrogen treatment. Little evidence was found in this investigation for positive benefits from HRT, but some negative outcomes related to increased risk of various medical conditions were observed. In addition, equivocal results regarding the impact of estrogen on cognitive abilities in randomized trials may depend in part on the age of participants or time since last menstrual period (Sherwin, 2007, 2009). Regardless, the observations that central auditory-processing changes tend to affect men at much earlier ages than women and women tend to experience sudden changes around the time of menopause point to the potential role that hormones may play in central auditory abilities.

In addition to changes in the peripheral and central auditory pathways, consistent evidence indicated that older adults demonstrate decrements in higher-order cognitive-processing abilities, such as encoding and retrieving items from memory, attention, and executive process control. These changes have the potential to have an impact on auditory processing.
## **AGE-RELATED COGNITIVE CHANGES **

Age-related changes in cognitive processing have also been implicated in the auditory-processing difficulties of older adults. Older adults consistently demonstrate compromised performance on a wide range of cognitive and intellectual tasks. It is beyond the scope of the current chapter to discuss this topic in detail. The interested reader is referred to one of the many excellent reviews on this issue (see reviews in Cerella, 1985; Craik, 1977; Perfect & Maylor, 2000; Salthouse, 1999). Here, three of the leading classes of models of cognitive aging are briefly discussed. These theories have particular relevance to understanding the speech-processing difficulties of older adults. The theories are the generalized slowing models and models postulating reduced availability of specific higher-order resources, such as working memory capacity and inhibitory processes (see also a discussion of how these model classes may relate to language processing in Federmeier et al., 2003).
### **Generalized Slowing **

An important theory of age-related differences in cognitive performance suggests that much can be explained by global changes in the rate of processing between young and old individuals. For example, Cerella (1985) examined a number of investigations citing age-related decrements in cognitive performance and found a linear function between speed of processing and performance. This and other similar investigations (Cerella, 1991) have led to models that propose that age-related performance decrements can be attributed to “generalized slowing of the central nervous system uniformly affecting all information processes” (p. 215). Cerella’s (1985) early calculations indicated that the slope or overall slowing was smaller for sensorimotor processes than for higher-order cognitive processes. Subsequent research conducted by Salthouse (1994) indicated that perceptual speed, rather than age per se, accounts for a substantial amount of variance in cognitive performance comparisons between young and old. As an example of how generalized slowing might affect speech processing, Salthouse suggested that if older adults take longer to process information at each stage, there is a greater chance that the initial material will be degraded or lost by the time later segments are encountered. Think of trying to understand a conversation at a noisy ball game. The extra time spent trying to decipher an unusual or particularly difficult phrase might result in earlier speech segments being forgotten.

Other theories of cognitive aging point to changes in more specific processes either alone or in combination, rather than generalized slowing. Park and colleagues (2002) reported that general continuous decline starting in the 20s occurs for all processing-intensive tasks. They showed that there is a steady decline in performance of tasks that rely on processing speed, working memory, attentional control, or inhibitory processes. Either alone or in combination with changes in other processes, age- related changes in working memory capacity are frequently implicated.
### **Working Memory Reductions **

Over the last several decades, working memory has been associated with many processes and abilities, including but not limited to language comprehension, decision making, problem solving, and even general intelligence (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; Daneman & Carpenter, 1980; Daneman & Merikle, 1996). As Reuter-Lorenz and Sylvester (2005) pointed out, it is not surprising, given the number of abilities that are thought to be associated with working memory, that it has been implicated as a general causal mechanism of age-related cognitive decline. Older adults are frequently found to have impaired working memory capabilities (Park et al., 2002: Salthouse, 2003). Speech processing places heavy demands on working memory storage and processing mechanisms; therefore, any decrements in this resource would be expected to have a negative impact on speech processing. Research carried out by Baldwin and Ash (2010) indicated that the extra effort required to process a degraded speech signal further challenges both the working memory capacity and assessment of that capacity in older adults. This topic is discussed further in a subsequent section.
### **Inhibitory Deficits **

Age-related deficits in the ability to inhibit irrelevant task information are another prominent explanation for the cognitive processing difficulties of older adults (Hasher, Quig, & May, 1997; Hasher & Zacks, 1979; Kane, Hasher, Stoltzfus, & Zacks, 1994). Consistent with this perspective, older adults are more susceptible to the negative effects of proactive interference (Bowles & Salthouse, 2003). This form of interference occurs when previously learned information disrupts learning and memory of subsequent information. For example, when performing several trials of a working memory span task, older individuals were much more likely to include items learned in previous trials, thus reducing their performance on each successive trial (Bowles & Salthouse, 2003). Older adults also had more difficulty than younger adults clearing speech information that was no longer relevant out of working memory, and the irrelevant content could impair performance on subsequent tasks (Hasher et al., 1997).

There is evidence supporting each of these models of age-related changes in cognitive processing, and they may each play some role in the speech-processing difficulties of older adults. Age-related changes in peripheral hearing, central auditory pathways, and cognitive processing may all individually and interactively have an impact on the speech processing of older adults. How such age-related changes lead to challenges to speech processing is the focus of the next section.
## **AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN SPEECH PROCESSING **

As noted, older adults are much more likely than their younger counterparts to experience difficulties in spoken word recognition (Gordon-Salant, 1986; Marshall et al., 1996), particularly in the presence of adverse listening conditions, such as noise (Bergman, 1971; Gordon-Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1995b; Li et al., 2004; Pichora- Fuller et al., 1995; Tun, 1998). Speech-processing difficulties among older listeners are frequently evident despite the absence of clinically significant hearing loss (Schneider et al., 2002), which suggests the existence of APDs or that subclinical hearing loss plays a larger role in auditory difficulties than previously thought (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002).

The extent of the impact of speech-processing difficulties on everyday functioning is not well understood. To illustrate the potential importance of this issue, consider the observations of Schneider and colleagues (2000). They had younger and older adults listen to prose passages and then answer a series of questions regarding each passage. The questions pertained to either concrete details presented in the passage or integrative questions that required listeners to make inferences regarding the overall “gist” of the passage. First, note how this task resembles many communication situations in everyday life. We are frequently presented with a string of sentences (i.e., a spoken paragraph, passage, or story) and then expected not only to comprehend and remember the specifics of what was said but also to understand the general gist of the communication (i.e., inferring the tone, criticality, potential sarcasm, or humor).

Both young and older listeners in Schneider et al.’s (2000) investigation heard the passage at the same presentation level, and all listeners had clinically normal hearing abilities (which they defined as < 30 dB HL for frequencies up to 3 kHz). Not surprisingly, regardless of age, participants correctly answered more of the detail questions than the integrative questions. However, compared to the young, older listeners also answered fewer questions correctly overall and made relatively more errors on the integrative questions than the detail questions. This finding could be interpreted as reflecting an age-related cognitive impairment in speech processing per se. However, the researchers went on in a second investigation to compare performance in the same task when the presentation level of the sentences was adjusted as a function of the individual listeners’ pure-tone threshold. Using a fixed sensation level method in which stimuli were presented at a fixed level (often 50 dB) above threshold, the age differences in performance virtually disappeared. While both younger and older listeners still had more difficulty with the integrative questions than the detail questions, the performance function was essentially equivalent for both groups. These findings provide strong evidence for the impact of subclinical hearing loss on speech comprehension, a topic we return to in this chapter.

Elevated hearing thresholds account for a substantial portion of the speech-processing difficulties of older adults (Humes & Christopherson, 1991; Humes et al., 1994). However, many older adults experience speech-processing difficulties beyond what would be predicted by increased pure-tone thresholds alone (Frisina & Frisina, 1997; Humes & Christopherson, 1991). In an effort to examine the relative contribution of peripheral and central mechanisms in the speech-processing difficulties of older adults, Frisina and Frisina (1997) conducted research on young and elderly listeners with normal hearing and older listeners with varying levels of hearing impairment. In quiet conditions, the speech perception abilities of the young did not differ from the normal-hearing older listeners on measures of spondee word recognition and recognition of target words in sentences of high and low contextual support. (Spondee words are two-syllable words that have equal stress on both syllables.) Performance on these tasks was reduced for the hearing-impaired groups relative to the young and old listeners with normal hearing abilities. In the presence of noise, even older adults with normal hearing demonstrated decrements in speech-processing performance relative to the young listeners (Frisina & Frisina, 1997; Pichora- Fuller et al., 1995). These decrements in understanding speech are particularly evident when context is not available to aid recognition. This observation suggests that pure-tone threshold elevation alone may not account for all speech-processing difficulties experienced by older adults.

It was mentioned previously that age-related high-frequency hearing loss can make it difficult for older listeners to distinguish between certain consonants. There is also evidence that the rapid changes in spectral cues that are characteristic of the speech signal pose considerable challenges for older listeners.
### **Temporal Processing Deficits **

Effective speech processing relies on the listener’s ability to discern rapid changes in spectral cues. As discussed in the chapter on language processing, speech variability stemming from speaker and situational characteristics and phonemic variance due to coarticulation place tremendous importance on the temporal processing capabilities of listeners. For example, the ability to detect voice-onset-time (VOT) differences on the order of 10 ms (within a 0 to 40 ms range) enables a listener to distinguish between the syllables *da *and *ta *(Blumstein, Myers, & Rissman, 2005).

Neurophysiological evidence indicated that older listeners have difficulty processing rapid temporal changes in speech cues (Tremblay, Piskosz, & Souza, 2002). Young adults are able to make use of temporal cues, such as a 20 to 40 ms difference in VOT between the phonemes /p/ and /b/, which enables them to distinguish between words such as pill versus bill and pet versus bet. Older adults have greater difficulty resolving these subtle temporal differences. Illustrating this phenomenon, Tremblay and colleagues observed lower d′* scores for older listeners relative to younger listeners trying to discern between phoneme pairs that differed by VOT times of 10 ms. This difficulty was accompanied by delays in early sensory-attentional components of the ERP components elicited by the phonemes. For both young and older listeners, latency of the N1 component increased with increases in VOT. However, for older listeners, this increased N1 latency was particularly pronounced, relative to younger listeners, at VOTs of 30 ms or greater. Compared to younger listeners, older adults exhibited a delayed P2 component at all VOTs. Recall that both verbal and nonverbal auditory stimuli elicit a negative deflection in the ERP peaking approximately 100 ms after stimulus onset (the N1 component) followed by a positive deflection peaking around 200 ms poststimulus (the P2 component). Both N1 and P2 are modulated by the physical characteristics of a sound and by attention (see discussion in Federmeier et al., 2003) but are thought to reflect distinct processes (Martin & Boothroyd, 2000; Tremblay et al., 2002).

Tremblay and colleagues (2002) proposed several potential explanations for why these early sensory components may be delayed in older adults. Similar to proposals by Schneider and Pichora-Fuller (2001), they suggested that aging may be associated with loss of neural synchrony. Older auditory neurons may exhibit a decreased ability to synchronously time-lock on the initial consonant burst and then subsequently exhibit a larger response to the onset of voicing in phonemes with relatively long VOTs. Alternatively, delays may be caused from prolonged physiological recovery from forward masking or age-related slowing in refractory processes.

Consistent with the findings of Tremblay and colleagues (2002), Federmeier and colleagues (2003) observed delays in the N1 and P2 ERP components in older listeners in response to sentence initial words in a sentence-processing task. Interestingly, although these early components were delayed on average by 25 ms, the later N400 component reflecting semantic processing (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980) was not delayed in older listeners relative to the young. Both young and old listeners had higher- amplitude N400 responses to anomalous rather than congruent sentence final words, as was typically found (Curran, Tucker, Kutas, & Posner, 1993; Kutas & Hillyard, 1984) at equivalent latencies. The N400 component in response to semantically incongruous sentence final words was attenuated but not delayed in older adults (Faustmann, Murdoch, Finnigan, & Copland, 2007; Federmeier, Mclennan, De Ochoa, & Kutas, 2002; Federmeier et al., 2003).

The observation that early acoustic stages of processing are delayed indicates that older adults experience difficulty with early signal extraction processes. But, since later semantic components are not delayed, these investigations suggested that rather than experiencing generalized slowing (which would delay each stage additively), older adults may actually be making up for time lost during early stages by performing higher-order stages more quickly. They may be compensating during intermediate stages of lexical selection to complete semantic stages within the same time frame as younger listeners. Such a strategy of “making up for lost time” would allow older listeners to compensate for many speech-processing difficulties; however, the compensatory process would be expected to require mental effort and be capacity limited (Baldwin, 2002; McCoy et al., 2005; Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995). Compensatory processes would be expected to occur at the expense of other processing tasks (such as rehearsal and storage).

This issue is discussed in more detail as it is fundamental to understanding the speech-processing difficulties of older adults. But first, a more detailed discussion is provided of the impact of adverse listening conditions found in many recreational and occupational settings on speech comprehension in older adults.
### **Adverse Listening Conditions **

Adverse listening conditions such as noise, reverberation, and speeded or compressed speech are problematic for older adults. The presence of more than one adverse listening characteristic (i.e., noise and reverberation) is particularly detrimental to the speech comprehension of older listeners (Jenstad & Souza, 2007).
#### **Noise **

Noise has particularly deleterious effects on the performance of older adults. Because everyday speech processing frequently takes place in noisy, distracting environments, comprehension suffers. Word recognition scores obtained in the presence of noise are consistently lower than those obtained in quiet for both young and old adults, but older adults exhibit greater decrements even after adjusting for hearing loss (Wiley et al., 1998). Noise seems to exacerbate the speech-processing difficulties of older adults (Frisina & Frisina, 1997; Plomp & Mimpen, 1979; Tun, 1998; WGSUA, 1988; Wiley et al., 1998), as do other adverse listening conditions commonly found in the workplace, such as multiple sources of auditory distractions (Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995) and reverberation (for a review, see Gordon-Salant, 2005).

In one seminal investigation, Pichora-Fuller, Schneider, and Daneman (1995) examined sentence final word recognition among young and older listeners with normal-hearing and older presbycusic listeners across varying S/N ratios. The sentences provided either high or low contextual support to the listener. For example, a high contextual support sentence was, “The witness took a solemn oath” versus a low contextual sentence, “John hadn’t discussed the oath” (Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995, p. 595). Contextual cues aided the word recognition performance of both older groups to a greater extent than for younger listeners. Context played a beneficial role at increasingly higher S/N ratios in the young, older-normal-hearing, and presbycusic listeners, respectively. That is, when background noise was present—even though the sentences were louder than the noise—older listeners made use of context to improve their word recognition score. Younger adults could achieve nearly 100% word recognition at negative S/N ratios (when the noise was louder than the sentences), and thus context could provide no further benefit. Context was particularly helpful for the presbycusic listeners, improving their word recognition performance across a much broader range of S/N ratios relative to the improvement exhibited by young and older-normal-hearing listeners.

In general, it seems that the greater the word recognition difficulties of an individual or group, the more detrimental the effects of noise. For example, Wiley et al. (1998) found that the impact of noise increased with age, and that noise was more detrimental to males—who initially had lower word recognition performance relative to females’ performance.

In addition to these general effects of noise on speech comprehension, the specific effects of different types and levels of noise need to be examined. One important distinction is that between steady-state versus modulated noise. Several studies have compared the differential effects of these two types of noise.

*Steady-State and Modulated Noise *

Although noise in general impairs speech perception in the young and old alike, steady-state or constant noise is more disruptive than fluctuating or modulated noise, at least for listeners with normal hearing (Gifford, Bacon, & Williams, 2007; Smits & Houtgast, 2007). Young normal-hearing adults can take advantage of the short periods of quiet in fluctuating noise levels and thus are less disrupted in understanding speech compared to when they hear the same speech in constant noise. Older and hearing-impaired listeners are less able to benefit from the brief periods of quiet, particularly when they have gradually sloping hearing loss that is greatest at high frequencies (Eisenberg, Dirks, & Bell, 1995; Festen & Plomp, 1990). Whether this inability to benefit from the brief periods of quiet is due to reduced release from masking or from deficits in temporal processing is an open question.

Separating the noise source from the target signal benefits all listeners to some degree (Dubno, Ahlstrom, & Horwitz, 2002). But, much like modulating the noise, young listeners benefit from the spatial separation more than older listeners, and older listeners with good hearing benefit more than presbycusic listeners. Because all listeners tend to show some benefit, separating competing sound sources as much as possible is a highly recommended ergonomic practice.

The presence of noise can compound negative effects stemming from other adverse conditions, such as speeded or compressed speech (Jenstad & Souza, 2007). For example, Tun (1998) had young and old listeners recall sentences under varying conditions of speech rate and noise level. She observed that noise had more detrimental effects on sentence recall for older relative to younger listeners, particularly when the sentences were presented at fast speech rates. At the normal speech rate, older and younger listeners were equally efficient in recall at +6 dB S/N ratio. At the fastest speech rate, however, older listeners required S/N ratios of +18 dB to achieve word recall accuracies comparable to young listeners.
#### **Reverberation **

Reverberation is the persistence of sound in an enclosed space after the source of the sound has stopped. The reverberation or echoes caused by the original sound bouncing off the walls can cause distortion and lead to difficulties in perceiving and understanding the sound. Reverberation is measured in terms of the time it takes for a sound to decrease to 60 dB below its steady-state level. Long reverberation times and their processing challenges are characteristic of both large rooms with high ceilings and rooms with reflective materials such as glass (Gordon-Salant, 2005).

Hearing-impaired and older adults are particularly susceptible to the negative impact of reverberation. However, reverberation and the high noise levels that frequently accompany it in classroom settings are recognized as a problem for all ages (Picard & Bradley, 2001). Bilingual speakers fluent in a second language demonstrate greater word recognition disruption relative to native speakers in the presence of reverberation (Rogers, Lister, Febo, Besing, & Abrams, 2006). In general, reverberant environments are notably problematic for older listeners (Helfer & Wilber, 1990).

Moderate-to-large reverberation distortions—typically on the order of 0.4 and 0.6 reverberation times—affect the speech recognition performance of older listeners with good hearing (Gordon-Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1995a). That is, at these levels of distortion, age, independent of hearing loss, impairs recognition. The hearing loss among both young and old listeners results in significant decrements in speech recognition in the presence of reverberation even at much lower distortion levels. At reverberation times of 0.2 and 0.3, hearing-impaired listeners have lower recognition scores relative to their performance in a no-reverberation control condition (Gordon- Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1995a). In addition to these aspects of the listening environment that have an impact on the mental workload of speech processing, the quality of the speech signal also plays a role.
### **Speech Signal Quality **

Poor signal quality in the speech being processed will cause additional difficulties for older adults. Poor signal quality can stem from a number of factors, including low intensity (it simply is not loud enough) and fast speech (it either is spoken too quickly or is digitally speeded up).
#### **Presentation Level or Intensity **

One of the primary factors that will have an impact on the difficulty or ease of speech processing, particularly for older adults, is the presentation level or intensity of the speech signal. How loud the signal is, in relationship to the background noise, will have a significant impact on the effort required not only to recognize but also to understand and remember spoken material.

Results of several investigations provided evidence that even among young people, reducing the intensity of speech stimuli (while keeping it within an audible range) increased mental workload. The increased effort required to process lower- intensity speech stimuli impaired the listener’s memory for the material (Baldwin & Ash, 2010; McCoy et al., 2005). In cognitively demanding situations (like while simultaneously driving and performing some other task), speech of lower intensity is more likely to be misunderstood and will take longer to respond to (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002).

For example, decrements increase the attentional resource requirements of working memory, thus compromising performance in other resource-demanding cognitive tasks (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002; Lindenberger, Scherer, & Baltes, 2001; Schneider & Pichora-Fuller, 2000). Empirical investigations with young nonhearing-impaired adults indicated that a reduction in presentation level of just 10 dB resulted in significant decrements in cognitive task performance (Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002). Young participants exhibited cognitive task performance decrements mirroring those commonly found in older adults when attentional demands were high and the presentation level of an auditory task was decreased from 55 to 45 dB. This 10 dB decrease in presentation level could be considered functionally equivalent to an elevation in threshold sensitivity that would be commonly experienced by an older listener. Note, however, that a 10 dB threshold increase would not result in a classification of even mild hearing impairment. Due to compromised hearing acuity, older adults expend greater attentional resources in auditory-processing tasks, thereby compromising their performance and safety in complex multitask environments. Understanding the interaction between sensory and cognitive processing can have great impact on our technological capability to augment performance among older adults.
#### **Speech Rate **

Speech processing under normal conditions requires the rapid translation of phonological segments into coherent semantic meanings. As discussed in Chapter 8 , a normal conversational speech rate is approximately 140 words per minute (wpm; Stine et al., 1986). Older adults are more adversely affected by compressed or fast speech, particularly when time compression cooccurs with other adverse listening conditions, such as reverberation or noise (Gordon-Salant & Fitzgibbons, 1995b). Stine et al. (1986) examined proposition recall from spoken sentences of varying complexity among young and older listeners at speech rates of 200, 300, and 400 wpm. As illustrated in Figure 10.2 , at the 200 wpm rate, no age differences were observed. However, at the faster 300 and 400 wpm rates, older adults recalled fewer propositions. Interestingly, although participants in general recalled fewer propositions as the sentences became more complex and as speech rate increased, the impact of sentence complexity was not greater for older adults than young adults. This finding suggests that it was the speech encoding that required more processing time rather than the processing of semantic complexities.

**FIGURE 10.2 **Proposition recall as a function of sentence complexity and speech rate for young and older listeners. (Data from Stine, E. L., Wingfield, A., & Poon, L. W. (1986). How much and how fast: Rapid processing of spoken language in later adulthood. *Psychology and Aging, 1 *(4), 303–311.)

Note that for Stine et al.’s (1986) data, O1 indicates a sample of older adults with uncharacteristically high education and verbal ability scores relative to the younger sample. O2 represents a community-dwelling sample of older adults matched to the young sample on these two characteristics.

Verbatim recall of individual words in a spoken sentence was used as a measure of speech processing in another experiment examining the impact of speech rate on younger and older adults in full- and-divided attention conditions (Tun, Wingfield, Stine, & Mecsas, 1992). Verbatim recall of words decreased as speech rates increased across levels of 140, 182, and 280 wpm. Word recall was lower for older adults relative to younger adults at all speech rates, but recall among older adults was particularly disrupted by increased speech rate. However, similar to the Stine et al. (1986) results, recall was not differentially lower in older relative to younger adults under the more resource demanding dual-task conditions compared to the full-attention conditions. This finding is somewhat surprising given the observation that older adults are frequently (although not always) more disrupted by increased-complexity or divided-attention conditions. Speech processing is a well-learned task, and older adults appear to have developed compensatory mechanisms that allow them to maintain performance on communication tasks in many situations, particularly when listening conditions are ideal. As will be discussed further, differential dual-task costs (DTCs) among older adults relative to younger are not always observed. If the overall dual-task difficulty is not sufficiently great, perhaps because one or more of the tasks involved is highly practiced or automatized, then older adults may demonstrate preserved performance levels. In addition to differential age-related decrements observed in processing fast speech, the use of synthetic speech also tends to have increased negative consequences for older relative to younger adults.
#### **Synthetic Speech **

Older adults are differentially negatively affected by synthetic speech (Humes, Nelson, & Pisoni, 1991; Logan, Greene, & Pisoni, 1989; Roring, Hines, & Charness, 2007). For example, Roring et al. examined recognition performance among young and older adults for natural and synthetic speech. They examined both isolated words and words presented in supportive sentence contexts. Older adults had significantly lower recognition accuracy scores in all but the natural sentence condition. That is, the availability of sentential context seemed to assist older adults in achieving recognition scores comparable to those of younger listeners when natural speech was used, but the use of context was not sufficient when synthetic speech was used. Older adults’ recognition performance was worst when attempting to recognize isolated words presented in synthetic voice. The differential decrements among older adults when processing synthetic speech are understandable considering the evidence that synthetic speech requires more cognitive effort to process than natural speech even among younger listeners (Koul, 2003).
### **Under Divided Attention **

Older adults may often be able to compensate for their speech-processing abilities by exerting more effort into the listening task (McCoy et al., 2005; Tun et al., 2009; Wingfield, Tun, & McCoy, 2005). In dual-task situations, which may be frequently encountered in the workplace (Lindenberger et al., 2000; Schneider et al., 2000), competing demands make compensation more challenging. As Lindenberger et al. (2000) pointed out, older individuals appear to have greater difficulty performing more than one task at a time, relative to their younger counterparts. They found that even relatively well-learned tasks like walking seemed to require greater cognitive effort for older adults relative to younger adults. In their study, older adults were not able to successfully recall as many words when required to encode verbal lists while walking versus sitting. Younger adults were relatively unaffected by this dual-task demand. Lindenberger et al. concluded that basic sensory and motor tasks required greater cognitive control and effort for older relative to younger adults. Even after single-task performance decrements are accounted for, greater performance decrements are frequently observed in dual-task situations for older as compared to younger participants. This finding, often referred to as a DTC, is particularly evident under specific conditions.

As described by Lindenberger et al. (2000), the types of situations in which these DTCs become particularly evident are as follows: (a) when the two tasks share the same modality in either stimulus presentation or response modality; (b) when heavy demands are placed on working memory (i.e., when stimuli or task sequencing must be maintained and coordinated without the aid of external cues); and (c) when one or more of the tasks requires a high degree of cognitive control processes, such as focusing attention, divided-attention strategies (i.e., scheduling and planning), and coding contextual representations. The extent to which these dual-task costs have an impact on general speech-processing tasks remains an important area of investigation.

The extent to which DTCs exacerbate the speech-processing difficulties of older adults is of importance since listening to speech often occurs in conjunction with other tasks (i.e., having a conversation while driving or walking or while engaged in some activity at work). As previously discussed, Tun et al. (1992) observed that older adults recalled fewer words than younger adults in dual-task conditions, but this age-related recall difference was no greater in the dual-task condition than it was in the full-attention condition. While this observation would appear to conflict with the Lindenberger et al. (2000) results, the two investigations used substantially different measures of speech processing. Lindenberger et al. required memory for lists of unrelated words. Tun et al. (1992) required verbatim recall of 15 word sentences. Older adults are adept at using sentential context to improve speech-processing performance. Therefore, as discussed previously, older adults may be able to offset the additional processing requirements by placing greater reliance on top-down processing until some critical threshold is reached and the total processing resources of the dual-task demands exceed their available capacity (Pichora-Fuller, 2008). Using a variety of different concurrent task pairings in our lab, we frequently do not observe age differences in speech-processing performance until the resource demands of the concurrent task exceed some moderate level (Baldwin, 2001; Baldwin, Lewis, et al., 2006; Baldwin & Struckman-Johnson, 2002). In line with theories of mental workload discussed elsewhere in this book, older adults may still be expending greater effort to process the speech signal. It is likely that the greater effort required by older adults may not manifest in performance decrements until some critical demand threshold is reached and available resources are exceeded.

Further support for this idea is found in the link between working memory capacity and speech recognition. Lunner, Rudner, and Ronnberg (2009) discussed evidence that older individuals with greater working memory capacities are better able to cope with the distorting effects of hearing aids, particularly in challenging listening situations. In less-challenging situations, interindividual differences are less important. This suggests that having ample working memory capacity allows the older adult to rely more heavily on top-down processing to overcome the degraded bottom-up signal.

The question remains: How are older adults using top-down processes? Brainimaging studies indicated that when performance levels are the same, older adults recruit more neural areas relative to their younger counterparts, typically prefrontal regions associated with executive control (Cabeza, 2002; Grady et al., 1994; Reuter- Lorenz & Cappell, 2008). Are these extracortical areas being activated because older adults are using different strategies to perform the same task, or are they relying on areas associated with higher-level cognitive processes (i.e., working memory) to compensate for reduced sensory activation—a decline compensation perspective? The issue is considered in the next section. But first, due the importance of age- related changes in speech processing, a summary is provided.

In sum, older adults frequently report difficulties in everyday auditory communication tasks (Pichora-Fuller, 1997; Schneider et al., 2000), particularly in the presence of noise (Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995; Plomp & Mimpen, 1979). In adverse listening situations (i.e., in the presence of noise), decrements in speech perception become evident in adults as early as age 50 (Bergman, 1980; Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995). Age-related changes in both peripheral and central auditory mechanisms as well as cognitive changes interactively contribute to the hearing difficulties of older adults.

Several possible reasons exist for why even mild, subclinical hearing loss can affect speech comprehension. Researchers and audiologists have long recognized the inadequacies and inherent difficulties involved in predicting everyday speech-processing abilities from clinical measures of pure-tone audiometry and speech recognition thresholds (American Speech and Hearing Association [ASHA], 1979, 1997, 2002). Conventional hearing assessments are based on detection of pure tones in the low frequencies (500, 1,000, and 2,000 Hz) and high frequencies (3,000 and 4,000 Hz) under ideal listening conditions (Lloyd & Kaplan, 1978). However, frequencies above 4,000 Hz play an essential role in speech perception for hearing-impaired listeners in both quiet and noisy environments and for persons with normal hearing in noisy environments. In addition, although higher levels are sometimes used, standard definitions indicated that pure-tone detection thresholds must be at least 26 dB to be classified as indicating even mild hearing impairment (Carhart, 1965; Miller et al., 1951; Silman & Silverman, 1991). Audiologists widely agree that speech recognition thresholds are dramatically affected by changes in presentation level as small as 2 dB (Pavlovic, 1993). Further, even pure-tone thresholds have been found to increase under conditions involving the imposition of a simultaneous dual task (Baldwin & Galinsky, 1999). In light of these findings, it comes as less of a surprise that older adults often experience speech-processing difficulties in everyday situations—for which listening conditions are likely to be less than ideal—and when people are often engaged in other simultaneous tasks (including such seemingly simple tasks as walking).
## **STRATEGY DIFFERENCES AND COMPENSATION **

As discussed in the previous section, dual-task costs may be more evident in older adults due to their need to expend more effort during sensory processing stages to decipher degraded sensory stimuli. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), Wong et al. (2009) documented that during speech-processing tasks older adults, relative to young, showed reduced activation in the auditory cortex but greater activation in areas associated with higher-order processes such as working memory and attention. These cortical changes were particularly strong when older adults were listening to speech in a noise condition. These results suggest older adults are relying on working memory and other higher-order processes to compensate for a degraded sensory representation. Other investigations indicated that older adults may, in part, be using different strategies than young adults to perform the same task. Support for this came from investigations documenting reduced hemispheric asymmetry as a function of age. Patterns of asymmetry among older adults for tasks in which young adults demonstrated symmetrical processing have led researchers to question whether older individuals are experiencing dedifferentiation of neural mechanisms, using compensatory strategies, or simply using different strategies.

It is well known that the left hemisphere generally shows greater involvement in most speech-processing tasks for most individuals (Floel et al., 2004). The exception is the processing of emotion and prosodic cues, which rely heavily on right hemispheric mechanisms. However, older adults demonstrated more symmetrical patterns of activity during speech-processing tasks relative to their younger counterparts (Bellis et al., 2000; Cabeza, Daselaar, Dolcos, Budde, & Nyberg, 2004; Cabeza, McIntosh, Tulving, Nyberg, & Grady, 1997).

For example, Bellis et al. (2000) used ERPs to examine hemispheric response patterns as children, young adults, and older adults performed a phonological discrimination task. They observed symmetrical patterns of N1-P1 activity over the left and right temporal lobes in a group of older participants, while children and young adults exhibited characteristically greater left hemisphere activity when performing the same task. In addition, the same group of older adults demonstrated greater difficulty discriminating between speech syllables involving rapid spectrotemporal changes relative to the younger participants.

These patterns of asymmetry among older adults for tasks in which young adults demonstrated symmetrical processing have led researchers to question whether older individuals are experiencing dedifferentiation of neural mechanisms, using compensatory strategies, or simply different strategies (see reviews in Greenwood, 2000, 2007). It is of interest to note that, regardless of age, females also tended to demonstrate more symmetrical patterns of brain activation during language-processing tasks (Nowicka & Fersten, 2001) and music processing (Koelsch et al., 2003). Since females tend to demonstrate better verbal fluency across the life span and better word recognition abilities into advanced age (Gates et al., 1990), one must be reluctant to conclude that the patterns of symmetry mean older adults are using additional neural mechanisms in an attempt to compensate for what would otherwise be reduced performance. Whether older adults are recruiting additional brain mechanisms in an attempt to offset processing deficits or simply using different strategies to process the same information has important implications for mental workload. Compensatory mechanisms suggest that workload overall is higher for the same task. Conversely, strategy differences suggest that specific types of workload will increase.
### **Strategy Differences **

Evidence that older adults may use different strategies compared to the young to perform the same kinds of tasks comes from several studies. Older adults appear to rely more on subvocal rehearsal or phonological strategies than younger adults for performing a variety of tasks (Hartley et al., 2001; O’Hanlon, Kemper, & Wilcox, 2005). This increased reliance on verbal-phonological strategies occurs even when it hinders performance (such as when visually discriminable objects have phonologically similar names). For example, working memory is thought to consist of several separable systems for maintaining information: a phonological, a visual, and a spatial system (Cocchini et al., 2002; Della Sala, Gray, Baddeley, Allamano, & Wilson, 1999; Hartley et al., 2001). Younger adults showed greater dissociation between these systems when performing working memory tasks and therefore when they were performing a task such as visual recognition of objects with phonologically similar names; they were less susceptible to the phonological similarity effect (Hartley et al., 2001). Older adults appeared to use the confusing, phonologically similar names when it was not necessary and even when it tended to impair performance. Older adults in general were more susceptible to the phonological similarity effect (O’Hanlon et al., 2005).

Hartley et al. (2001) concluded that working memory processes remain dissociable in old age, but they suggested that older adults may rely more on acoustic strategies, even when they are not advantageous, and may in fact have difficulty inhibiting subvocal rehearsal. They suggested that older adults may have learned to rely on a subvocal rehearsal and naming strategy to aid memory systems associated with object identity and spatial location, a strategy available but not utilized in younger adults.

If adults do tend to rely on acoustic or verbal strategies more as they get older, a strategy shift of this sort would have important implications for use of displays and advanced technologies. For example, when navigating some people tend to form a map-like mental representation relying primarily on visuospatial working memory, while others tend to use a verbal-sequential list of directions relying primarily on verbal working memory (Baldwin & Reagan, in press; Garden, Cornoldi, & Logie, 2002). When young people rely on a verbal-sequential strategy, they are much more susceptible to interference from tasks that prevent articulatory rehearsal relative to tasks that require visuospatial processing (Baldwin & Reagan, in press; Garden et al., 2002). To the extent that older adults are relying on verbal strategies to aid performance, they could be expected to find verbal interference far more detrimental than visuospatial interference. Performance decrements under verbal interference conditions might be much greater than expected and present on a wider range of tasks in older adults relative to their younger counterparts.

The greater reliance on verbal strategies might concurrently help explain why auditory and verbal displays, in particular, seem to be more beneficial than visual displays to older adults in applied settings, such as during driving (Baldwin, 2002; Dingus et al., 1997; Liu, 2000; Reagan & Baldwin, 2006), and why older adults find distracting speech so much more problematic than do younger listeners (Beaman, 2005; Tun et al., 2002; Wingfield, Tun, O’Kane, & Peelle, 2005). Dingus and colleagues observed that older drivers made significantly more safety-related errors, particularly when attempting to use a navigational information system *without *voice guidance. Older drivers appeared to benefit from the advanced traveler information system as long as it contained the voice guidance display. Similarly, Liu (2001) observed that an auditory display either alone or in combination with a visual display reduced navigational errors in a driving simulation for all drivers, but particularly benefited older drivers. Providing information to the drivers in an auditory format (either with or without redundant visual information) also decreased steering wheel variability among older drivers. Variation in steering wheel movements has been used to assess the difficulty or attentional demand of a secondary task (Hoffmann & Macdonald, 1980). Since navigation is a challenging task for many older drivers (Burns, 1999; Dingus et al., Hulse et al., 1997), providing effective displays to aid in this task could substantially improve safety and mobility of this fast-growing segment of the driving population.
### **Compensatory Mechanisms **

Compensatory mechanisms are an alternative explanation for the observation that older adults often demonstrate hemispheric asymmetry for tasks in which young adults demonstrate symmetrical processing. Older adults may be trying to compensate for what would otherwise be reduced performance (Cabeza, 2002; Dennis et al., 2008). Grady (1998) discussed several neuroimaging investigations that indicated that older individuals recruit different brain mechanisms than young to perform the same tasks to the same proficiency level. She referred to this observed phenomenon as “functional reorganization” and suggested that it probably plays a compensatory role in maintaining performance.

Observations that older adults make greater use of context (Abada et al., 2008) along with the commonly observed posterior-anterior processing shift in older adults (Dennis et al., 2008) suggests that older adults are using more executive control processes and associated neural mechanisms to compensate for reduced sensory-perceptual abilities. It may be that older adults exhibit both strategy shifts and compensatory processing in an effort to reduce the negative impact of aging sensory and cognitive mechanisms. An understanding of these age-related changes can facilitate design.
## **AGE-RELATED DESIGN **

In this final section of this chapter, attention is turned to methods of facilitating the sensory-cognitive processing abilities of older adults through design. Suggestions are presented for constructing a supportive environment for listening for older adults that will serve to also benefit listeners of all ages.

Plomp and Mimpen (1979) suggested that to allow older listeners to communicate effectively, background noise levels in a room need to be on average 5 to 10 dB lower than those adequate for normal-hearing young listeners. In terms of S/N ratios, for older adults with normal hearing it is recommended that the signal be at least 8 dB above noise levels to ensure that speech with rich contextual cues is comprehended at levels that would be expected for young listeners (Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995). If contextual cues are low or absent or if designing for older adults with some degree of hearing loss, then effective S/N ratios will need to be much higher.

Whenever possible, when the distracting noise is irrelevant speech, separating the physical location of the noise from the signal—or at least its perceived physical location—can aid speech processing in both younger and older adults (Li et al., 2004). Providing contextual cues also aids the older listener.

Older listeners, particularly presbycusic listeners, benefit more than young listeners from supportive contextual cues (Pichora-Fuller et al., 1995). Older adults may be more adept at using contextual cues to compensate for reduced or noisy recognition processes (see discussion by Federmeier et al., 2003). Older adults consistently demonstrated larger priming effects in lexical decision tasks relative to their younger counterparts (see metanalysis by Laver & Burke, 1993). For example, Madden (1988) observed that older, relative to younger, adults’ performance of a lexical decision task using visually presented words declined more when the words were degraded. Madden presented asterisks between letters. Presenting the degraded words in the context of a sentence benefited older participants more than the younger. These findings suggest that older adults have more difficulty with the feature-level extraction processes, and as Laver and Burke (1993) pointed out, these findings support process-specific models of cognitive aging rather than generalized slowing accounts.

For guidelines pertaining to the design of in-vehicle displays for older adults, see the work of Baldwin (2002). For example, auditory displays are preferable to visual displays for presenting both advance collision warning and navigational information. However, the presentation level of these auditory warnings should be on average 10 dB above a level adequate for younger drivers and ideally would be calibrated for the driver’s individual hearing capabilities. Processing degraded or ignoring irrelevant auditory information requires mental effort—effort that must be diverted away from other tasks like maintaining vehicle control and hazard detection. Providing succinct auditory messages regarding time-critical events using standard terminology at acoustic levels clearly audible to older listeners can greatly enhance the safety and mobility of older drivers.

Additional information and methods aimed at designing more effective products, systems, and interfaces for older adults regardless of the presentation modality can be found in a book, *Designing for Older Adults *(Fisk, Rogers, Charness, Czaja, & Sharit, 2009).
## **SUMMARY **

Age-related changes in hearing and cognition can independently and interactively compromise the information-processing capabilities of older adults. Both types of changes can alter temporal processing capabilities, resulting in a less-distinct signal that requires more cognitive effort to effectively distinguish. In this way, hearing impairments may masquerade as cognitive impairments, further complicating the communication process and contributing to frustration and decreased engagement levels on the part of both the older listeners and their social and work counterparts. Hearing impairment makes listening more effortful, thus compromising higher-order cognitive capabilities, such as short-term and long-term retention. At the same time that reduced hearing capability can be manifest as reduced working memory capability, larger working memory capability can offset some of the detriment caused by declining hearing. Thus, high-functioning older adults may be able to compensate for declining hearing abilities better or longer than their less-high-functioning counterparts. But, these compensatory efforts detract from the attentional effort a person might otherwise be able to devote to some other concurrent task. Attending to the human factors design approaches and guidelines for older adults set forth in the existing literature can greatly enhance the cognitive and performance capabilities of older adults.
## **CONCLUDING REMARKS **

The focus of this chapter has been on age-related changes in hearing that have an impact on auditory cognition. After discussing the nature of some of these changes, their impact on specific aspects of auditory processing, such as understanding speech and dual-task performance, were discussed. In the final section, age-related design was discussed. Fortunately, generally the design approaches and guidelines that benefit older adults also benefit others. That is, the guidelines may be particularly important for ensuring that older adults are able to effectively benefit from a given device or display, but they generally improve performance in all age groups. In the next chapter, the focus is on auditory display design in general. In the same way that designing for older adults generally benefits everyone, the guidelines discussed in the next chapter that are meant as general guidelines for all adults will surely benefit older adults, perhaps even more than they do their younger counterparts.

- * Specifically, a particular molecule, cadherin 23 (CDH23), has been implicated. CDH23 is thought to play a role in the mechanotransduction activity of inner ear hair cells (Siemens et al., 2004). Mutations in the CDH23 gene are associated with deafness and age-related hearing loss. As Siemens and colleagues (2004) pointed out, CDH23 may play a significant role in regulating the mechanotransduction channel of the tip link. This tip link, only 150–200 nm long, is the area thought to regulate the mechanically gated ion channels in hair cells. A link has been observed between aquaporins (aquaporin 4 [Aqp4] expression in particular, a protein that regulates water and ion flux across cell membranes in the cochlea and inferior colliculus) and auditory threshold changes associated with both age and mild-versus-severe presbycusis in mice (Christensen, D’Souza, Zhu, & Frisina, 2009).
- * Here, d′ is a measure of the sensitivity of an observer to distinguish between one condition and another or to determine a signal against a background of noise. Lower d′ scores indicate lower sensitivity.