# Unknown Chapter

*Source: Auditory Cognition and Human Performance by C. L. Baldwin (2012)*

---

# 3 **Auditory Pattern Perception *****The Auditory Processing System ***

## **INTRODUCTION **

To extract meaning from the many sources of sound in the environment, we must be able to sense, encode, and interpret auditory patterns. Fortunately, humans have a number of sophisticated physical structures in the auditory processing system that are specially designed to receive, organize, and encode acoustic information. These structures are what give humans the remarkable ability to recognize meaningful patterns from among the cacophony of sounds present in the acoustic environment: auditory pattern recognition. The auditory structures and the associated processes that make possible this ability are the focus of this chapter.

Auditory processing requires both hearing (a sensory process) and its interpretation (a perceptual-cognitive process). These processes can be closely tied to the concepts of bottom-up and top-down processing. Stimulus-driven sensory processes are often referred to as data-driven or bottom-up processes, while the interpretation of sensations can be referred to as contextually driven or top-down processing. Both bottom-up and top-down processes are essential to auditory processing, interacting and taking on various degrees of importance in different situations. A discussion of top-down processing is deferred to the next chapter on auditory cognition, while the current chapter focuses on the essentials of stimulus-driven, bottom-up processes. The physical characteristics of sounds, namely, the stimulus features that constitute bottom-up processing of the acoustic input to the ear, are discussed first, followed by a description of basic sound characteristics as well as the peripheral and central mechanisms involved in their perception. Readers already familiar with these sensory aspects of auditory processing may wish to skip ahead to the next chapter.

Auditory pattern perception must begin with the intake of the sound stimulus, the physical energy from the environment. The following section presents some of the important physical characteristics of sounds and how are they received and processed by the ear and brain.
## **CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND PERCEPTION **

In general, perception of sound involves three steps: generation of sound by a source, transmission of the sound through an elastic medium, and reception of the sound by a receiver (Hartmann, 1995). This chapter deals primarily with the first and last steps. First, a brief overview of the basic characteristics of sounds and the auditory sensory system is presented. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to provide a detailed account of this system. Readers interested in more detail may wish to consult one of the several excellent texts on the physical structures of the mechanisms of hearing (e.g., see Katz, Stecker, & Henderson, 1992; Moore, 1995; Yost, 2006). For the present purposes, some key fundamentals of the physical characteristics of sound are discussed in the next section.
### **The Sound Stimulus **

Sound is a mechanical pressure caused by the displacement of an elastic medium such as air or water (Coren, Ward, & Enns, 1999; Moore, 1995). The displacement results in changes in atmospheric pressure that are funneled into the auditory system by the pinna, through the auditory canal to the eardrum. For an in-depth description of the physical aspects of sound signals, see the work of Hartmann (1995). The physical structures involved in the process of collecting sound and converting sound into neural signals are discussed briefly in the next section. But first, a few key characteristics of sounds are described.
#### **Frequency **

Humans are capable of hearing sounds from roughly 20 to 20,000 hertz (Hz) or cycles per second. As illustrated in Figure 3.1 , the peak-to-peak period represents the amount of time taken to complete one full cycle. The number of cycles per second is referred to as the frequency of the tone. Frequency is subjectively perceived as the pitch of a sound. As the sound wave moves faster (completes more cycles per second), the frequency and its perceived pitch typically both increase. In other words, sounds with higher frequency are perceived as higher in pitch.

The frequency of everyday speech has a range of roughly 10 kHz. However, humans are able to understand speech when a much narrower range is presented, on the order of 500–3,500 Hz, such as the limited bandwidth or range of analog telephone transmissions (Kent & Read, 1992). Humans are most sensitive to the frequency range between 2,000 and 4,000 Hz. Fortunately, this range encompasses most of the frequencies critical to speech processing (Kryter, Williams, & Green, 1962). However, the fundamental frequency of the human voice is much lower, with males having a fundamental vocal frequency (FVF) approximating 100 Hz, females an FVF of approximately 200 Hz, and children’s FVF ranging from approximately 250 to 400 Hz (Hudson & Holbrook, 1982; Kent & Read, 1992). There are considerable individual differences in FVF; in general FVF decreases with advancing age. People who smoke also tend to have lower FVF. Our ability to perceive vocal characteristics such as FVF provide important speaker cues in normal everyday conversation (Andrianopoulos, Darrow, & Chen, 2001; Gregory, Green, Carrothers, Dagan, & Webster, 2001), a topic addressed further in Chapter 8 on speech processing.

**FIGURE 3.1 **Sound waves and frequency.

Humans are sensitive to frequency changes. Specifically, the human ear can detect minute changes in atmospheric pressure caused by the vibratory displacements of an elastic medium. This ability explains why so many of the courageous (or perhaps narcissistic) individuals who sing karaoke tend to sound so bad. Their pitch is often painfully off. How hard can it be to sing a familiar melody? Does the average karaoke singer really think he or she is in tune? In reality, the individual may be close to the intended familiar pitch. However, even slight differences can be easily detected by most listeners. Our sensitivity to minute changes in frequency also assists in a number of practical everyday tasks, such as distinguishing between various consonant sounds and in interpreting the emotional content of a spoken message. Theories of how we accomplish this task, commonly referred to as pitch perception, are discussed in Chapter 7 in reference to musical pitch perception; also, see reviews by de Boer and Dreschler (1987), Moller (1999), and Tramo, Cariani, Koh, Makris, & Braida (2005). Another primary characteristic of sound is its amplitude.
#### **Amplitude **

The amplitude of a sound wave is determined by the change in pressure between the medium in which it travels (i.e., air or water) relative to the undisturbed pressure. Thus, it is common to speak of pressure amplitude. The height of the wave, as illustrated in Figure 3.2 , represents the pressure amplitude of a sound stimulus. The larger the displacement of the wave (in other words, the higher it is), the greater its amplitude is. For a simple sound wave in air, the pressure amplitude is the maximum amount of change relative to normal atmospheric pressure measured in the force per unit area expressed as dynes per square centimeter (Coren, Ward, & Enns, 1999).

Amplitude is subjectively perceived as loudness. In general, as amplitude increases, a sound is perceived as louder. However, a number of factors can affect perceived loudness (such as frequency and context); therefore, there is a far-from- simple, one-to-one relationship between amplitude and perceived loudness. As illustrated in Figure 3.2 , sound waves also have what is referred to as a phase. That is, relative to a reference wave, they are rising or falling. Presenting a sound of equal amplitude in opposing phase cancels out the sound. This principle is the basis behind active noise cancellation headphones, as illustrated in the right side of Figure 3.3 : destructive interference.

Humans can hear a range of sound amplitudes on the order of several thousand billion to one units of intensity. To represent this enormous range of sound levels more easily, sound intensity is conventionally measured on a base 10 logarithmic scale using a unit called the decibel (dB). The decibel scale represents the intensity of a sound relative to a reference level, which is usually close to the absolute threshold.

**FIGURE 3.2 **Sound waves and amplitude.

**FIGURE 3.3 **Phase-based noise cancellation.

The amplitude of everyday speech spans a range of roughly 60 dB (Kent & Read, 1992). Vowels are generally of higher amplitude, while consonants, and fricatives in particular (such as the “f” in fish), have the lowest amplitude. The amplitude range thus varies for a given speaker from utterance to utterance. Sound amplitude is also an important factor in determining the mental workload involved in processing speech. This topic is discussed in considerably more detail in the chapter on speech processing. For the present purposes, only the interaction between frequency and amplitude is examined.
#### **Frequency-Amplitude Interactions **

Frequency and amplitude interact in some interesting ways. For instance, in general, lower tones (e.g., 200 Hz) seem slightly lower as amplitude is increased, while higher tones (6,000 Hz) are perceived as slightly higher as amplitude increases (Rossing, 1990, as cited by Matlin & Foley, 1997, p. 312). In addition, humans are differentially sensitive to different frequencies. That is, sounds presented in certain frequency ranges are audible at lower intensity levels than are sounds presented at other frequencies. Figure 3.4 illustrates the audibility threshold at different frequencies. In particular, notice the lower threshold (meaning greater sensitivity) across the range of human speech. In higher-order, central auditory processes, we see that context also affects the perception of loudness. This is illustrated by a phenomenon referred to as recalibration (Marks, 1994), which is described in a further section.

**FIGURE 3.4 **Equal loudness contours.

Because the human ear is differentially sensitive across frequencies, soundlevel meters (SLMs), which are used to measure intensity levels, typically use a weighting system (designated A, B, C, and D). The two most commonly used weighting systems are the A-weighted network and the C-weighted network. The A-weighted network most closely simulates the response of the human ear by discriminating against (showing less sensitivity to) low frequencies. Specifically, the A scale assigns weights according to equal loudness contours at 40 dB (Loeb, 1986). The dBA scale is therefore frequently used to assess noise levels in various environments. The C-weighted scale presents equal weighting across frequencies or unweighted sound pressure level (SPL) and therefore is noted as dB (SPL) (Loeb, 1986). In addition to the physical properties of individual sounds, the acoustical context can affect perceptions of loudness. Recalibration is one such contextual effect.

*Masking *

Auditory masking refers to the phenomenon that occurs when one sound prevents or blocks the perception of another sound. Sounds have their greatest potential to mask other sounds that are close in frequency. For example, a loud 1,000-Hz tone will tend to mask other sounds with frequencies of 1,010, 1,100, and 990 Hz. Sounds tend to have more of a masking effect on sounds that are higher than they are relative to those that are lower in frequency, a phenomenon that gives rise to the term *upward spread of masking *(Scharf, 1971). However, at high loudness levels, masking effects are more symmetrical (Scharf, 1971).

*Recalibration *

Perceived loudness is subject to context effects through an adaptation-like change referred to as recalibration (Arieh & Marks, 2003; Marks, 1994). Essentially, if one is listening to a relatively intense tone at one frequency and a weak tone is presented at another frequency, the latter tone will be perceived as louder than it actually is (Arieh & Marks, 2003, see p. 382) Adaptation can result from either relatively brief continuous presentation of a single tone or from prolonged exposure to intense tones, which results in temporary threshold shift. Marks (1994) discovered an interesting phenomenon he termed loudness recalibration. Specifically, Marks noticed that for tones above threshold, if one tone frequency is presented at a high SPL and a tone of another frequency is presented at a lower SPL, the latter lower-SPL tone will sound louder than it really is. Marks distinguished loudness recalibration as distinct from sensory adaptation, “suprathreshold sensitivity changes in response to transient stimuli, under conditions in which sensory adaptation is not expected” (Arieh & Marks, 2003, p. 382).

Frequency and amplitude can be thought of as the two most primary characteristics of a sound stimulus. Up to this point, we have discussed these characteristics for pure tones. Pure tones consisting of only a single frequency rarely occur in the natural environment. Tuning forks are one example. Among musical instruments, the flute comes closer than most to being capable of producing a pure tone.

Pure tones can be created easily in laboratory settings using one of a variety of software packages or electronic devices, such as pure-tone generators. Pure tones can be described simply by discussing the frequency and amplitude pressure changes occurring in the basic pattern illustrated in Figure 3.1 and referred to as a simple sine wave.

Most naturally occurring sounds are complex, being composed of the interaction of a number of waves of different frequencies and phases. The human ear separates the components of complex sounds (up to six or seven components with training) in a crude version of Fourier analysis known as Ohm’s acoustical law. The individual components making up a complex tone are not heard as individual units but rather as a single tonal event (Plomp, 2002). Figure 3.5 illustrates a complex tone. This complex blend, referred to as timbre, is another key characteristic of most everyday sounds.
#### **Timbre **

Two tones of the same frequency and amplitude may still sound very different (such as the same note played by a piano vs. a clarinet). This difference in sound quality is due to a difference in timbre (pronounced like *timber *or *TAM-ber *; either is correct). Timbre is sometimes referred to as the *color *of a musical sound. Differences in timbre play an integral role in central auditory processing and in auditory stream segregation (a topic discussed in more detail in this chapter). Since most sounds present in the everyday auditory scene are complex, they are made up of a rich blend of frequencies referred to as harmonics. This complex blending of harmonics is what gives a sound its unique timbre. As the name implies, we refer to these blended sounds as complex and distinguish them from simple or pure tones. The objectives of the current text preclude further discussion of other, more minor characteristics of the sound stimulus. Instead, we turn now to a look at the auditory mechanisms, both peripheral and central, that are involved in processing the sound stimulus.

FIGURE 3.5 Complex sound wave.
### **Peripheral and Central Auditory Pathways **

The auditory system can be divided into two primary components, the peripheral hearing structures, encompassing the outer, middle, and inner ear, and the central auditory pathways located primarily within the cerebral cortex. Both peripheral and central auditory mechanisms are essential to auditory processing, and as we shall see, disruption of either mechanism can greatly affect the processing of auditory stimuli in everyday life.

**FIGURE 3.6 **The three ears. (Drawn by Melody Boyleston.)
#### **Peripheral Auditory System **

The human ear is thought to have evolved from the sense of touch and in fact shares several similarities with that sense modality. A structure in the inner ear called the cochlea contains specialized groups of cells with protruding hairs that resemble the hairs on our skin. These hairs respond to mechanical stimulation (Coren, 1999; Siemens et al., 2004). The human ear consists of three major divisions: the outer, middle, and inner ear ( Figure 3.6 ).

*The Three Ears *

The three divisions of the human ear each have key structures that aid in the reception of sound. The outer ear consists of the pinna and the auditory canal. The pinna, the fleshy visible portion of the ear, is designed to funnel the sound wave into the auditory canal. The folds that make up its shape assist with sound localization. The tube-like auditory canal is roughly 3 cm long, and its size results in the greater sensitivity observed for critical speech frequencies (2,000–4,000 Hz) (see discussion in Goldstein, 2002; Hong et al., 2001). The increased sensitivity to this range is due to resonance, the reflection of a sound wave in a closed tube that serves to increase intensity (Coren et al., 1999; Goldstein, 2002). Sound waves travel through the auditory canal, causing vibrations in the tympanic membrane, otherwise known as the eardrum.

The eardrum separates the outer ear and middle ear. Vibrations of the eardrum cause movement of the ossicles, three tiny bones located in the middle ear. These three bones—the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes (stirrup)—are the smallest bones in the human body. Their primary function is to amplify sound. Recall that sound is the displacement of an elastic medium such as air or water. If you have ever tried to listen to sound while swimming, you will understand that it is much harder to hear when your ears are under water. This is because sound travels much easier through low-density air than through the much-higher-density medium of water. The ossicles function like a fulcrum, transmitting the vibration from the relatively large eardrum to the much smaller stapes, which causes vibrations of the oval window, the gateway to the inner ear. This concentration of pressure from the eardrum to the much smaller oval window is much like the process of concentrating the weight of a human being onto a pair of stiletto heels. The tiny point of the high heel concentrates the weight, which can cause much greater damage to soft surfaces, such as gym floors, than the more evenly distributed surface of a flat shoe (Matlin et al., 1997). The middle ear muscles are the final middle ear structure of note. These muscles are the smallest skeletal muscles of the human body (Coren et al., 1999). The muscles serve a protective role; when the ear is exposed to high-intensity sound, they contract to dampen the movement of the ossicles.

The inner ear contains one of the most important structures in the human auditory system, the cochlea. The fluid-filled cochlea is a coiled bony structure resembling a snail in appearance. It is divided into two sections by a structure called the cochlear partition. The base of the cochlear partition is located near the stapes, and the apex is at the far end, deep inside the cochlea. The cochlear partition includes the organ of Corti, which contains the receptors for hearing. These receptors are called hair cells since tiny protrusions called cilia at the end of each cell resemble the tiny hairs found on the surface of the skin. Human hairs in the inner ear are specialized mechanosensors that transduce or convert the mechanical forces stemming from sound waves into neuroelectrical signals, providing us with our sense of hearing and balance (Siemens et al., 2004).

The organ of Corti rests on top the basilar membrane and is covered by the tectorial membrane. Movement of the stapes causes pressure changes in the fluid-filled cochlea, causing movement of the basilar membrane, which in turn results in an up-and-down movement of the organ of Corti and a back-and-forth movement of the tectorial membrane relative to the hair cells. The basilar membrane is about 3 cm long in humans and is stiffer at the base near the oval window, becoming wider (0.5 mm) and narrower (0.08 mm) at the apex (Coren et al., 1999).

**The approximately 15,000 hair cells are divided into two groups, including a single row of about 3,000 inner hair cells and three to five rows of outer hair cells arranged in V- or W-shaped rows. Each of the inner and outer hair cells has a set of smaller hair-like protrusions called cilia of differing sizes protruding from a single hair cell (Coren et al., 1999). The tallest cilia of the outer hair cells are embedded in the tectorial membrane, while the shorter cilia do not reach. The bending of these hair cells results in transduction (conversion of the mechanical motions of the ear into electrical activity in the auditory nerve). The hair cells nearest to the ossicles respond preferentially to high-frequency sounds, while those farthest away respond best to low-frequency sounds. These tiny hair cells can be damaged by exposure to intense sounds, although recent evidence suggests that some regeneration in mammals can occur (Lefebvre, Malgrange, Staecker, Moonen, & Van De Water, 1993; Shinohara et al., 2002). The hair cells synapse on the spiral ganglion nerves, which form the auditory nerve projecting toward the primary auditory cortex and the central auditory pathways of the brain. It is in these central auditory pathways that higher-order processing occurs **.

FIGURE 3.7 Auditory pathways. (Drawn by Melody Boyleston.)
### **Central Auditory Pathways **

The auditory nerve carries the signals beyond the ear to structures of the central nervous system, which lead to the primary auditory receiving area in the cortex. The first structure encountered is the cochlear nucleus ( Figure 3.7 ). The cochlear nucleus located in either hemisphere receives signals from the ipsilateral (same-side) ear and then projects the information to both the ipsilateral and contralateral (opposite side) superior olivary nucleus (Banich, 2004; Goldstein, 2002). This dual-hemisphere organization is a unique characteristic* of the auditory sensory system. In most other sensory systems (with the exception of olfaction), stimuli from one side of the body, once transduced into neural signals, project solely to the contralateral hemisphere of the brain (Banich, 2004, p. 29).

From the superior olivary nucleus, the pathway proceeds to the inferior colliculus and then on to the medial geniculate bodies in the thalamus. The medial geniculate bodies then project to several cortical areas, including the primary auditory cortex and several adjacent areas. The primary auditory receiving area (A1) is located in the superior portion of the posterior temporal lobe in an area referred to as Heschl’s gyrus, located in Brodmann area 41 ( Figure 3.8 ). Several adjacent areas, including Brodmann area 42, referred to as the second auditory cortex or A2, and Brodmann area 22 (Wernicke’s area for speech), also receive signals from the medial geniculate nucleus. The primary auditory cortex is arranged tonotopically, or organized in such a way that particular areas are more sensitive to certain acoustic frequencies, with neighboring areas demonstrating sensitivity to neighboring frequencies (Fishbach, Yeshurun, & Nelken, 2003; Hall, Hart, & Johnsrude, 2003). Low-frequency tones are processed in areas closer to the scalp (rostrally and laterally), and higher-frequency tones are processed in areas deeper in the cortex (caudally and medially) (Cansino, Williamson, & Karron, 1994).

**FIGURE 3.8 **Auditory cortex. (Drawn by Melody Boyleston.)

Evidence also indicated that pure tones are processed in the primary auditory cortex or core areas, while more complex tones are processed in the surrounding belt areas (Wessinger et al., 2001). After initial processing in the core and surrounding belt areas, signals travel to several areas throughout the cortex. Neurophysiological evidence indicates that physical characteristics of the sound stimulus such as intensity, frequency, and duration are differentially represented in unique cortical areas within the auditory cortex (Giard, Lavikainen, Reinikainen, Perrin, & Naatanen, 1995; Takegata, Huotilainen, Rinne, Naatanen, & Winkler, 2001).

Giard and colleagues (1995) utilized the mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigm to investigate the neural mechanisms involved in processing frequency, intensity, and duration. The MMN is an event-related potential (ERP) of the brain and can be recorded noninvasively from the scalp. The MMN is elicited in response to any discriminable change in a repetitive sound (Giard et al., 1995) and is thought to reflect an automatic comparison process between neural traces for standard repeating stimuli and deviant stimuli (Naatanen, Pakarinen, Rinne, & Takegata, 2004; Sams, Kaukoranta, Hamalainen, & Naatanen, 1991). Giard and colleagues, using dipole model analysis to identify the cortical source of the scalp-derived MMN, observed that the cortical location of the MMN responses varied as a function of whether a stimulus deviated from the standard in frequency, intensity, or duration.

Corroborating evidence for the modularity of these processes came from case studies showing that some auditory disorders involve differential or selective disability in one function while other aspects of auditory discrimination remain intact. For example, a small percentage (roughly 4%) of the population has a condition known as amusia or tone deafness. These individuals demonstrate consistent difficulty in differentiating fine-grained pitch changes, while their ability to distinguish time changes related to the duration of tones remains intact (Hyde & Peretz, 2004). One well-known individual, Che Guevara, the highly educated revolutionary figure involved in the Cuban revolution and portrayed in the movie *Motorcycle Diaries *, probably suffered from amusia (Friedman, 1998, as cited in Hyde & Peretz, 2004).

That different aspects of pitch perception are processed in separable neural locations (Griffiths, Buechel, Frackowiak, & Patterson, 1998) provides additional evidence for modularity. Griffiths and colleagues used positron emission tomography (PET) imaging to identify the brain regions involved in processing short-term (pitch computations) and longer-term (melodic pattern) temporal information (see discussion by Zatorre, 1998). They observed that short-term temporal integration was associated with increased activity in and around the primary auditory pathway (namely, the inferior colliculus and medial geniculate body). However, long-term tone sequences resulted in greater activation in two bilateral cortical areas, the right and left posterior superior temporal gyri and anterior temporal lobes. It is interesting to note that the tone-sequence patterns were associated with greater bilateral activity rather than the more typical right-hemispheric asymmetric pattern frequently cited for music perception (Koelsch, Maess, Grossmann, & Friederici, 2003; Tervaniemi & Hugdahl, 2003). Bilateral activation patterns for both music and speech are more common among females than males (Koelsch et al., 2003); however, Griffiths and colleagues did not report the gender of their participants. Specific cases of speech and music perception are discussed in more detail in further chapters. For now, we return to the topic of auditory processing in the central auditory pathways.

*Auditory Processing Streams *

Two central auditory pathways with separate functional significance have been identified (Clarke & Thiran, 2004; Rauschecker & Tian, 2000; Read, Winer, & Schreiner, 2002; Zatorre, Bouffard, et al., 2002). These dual streams originate in separate nonprimary auditory cortical areas and terminate in distinct locations with the frontal lobes (Romanski et al., 1999). Rauschecker (1998) referred to the dorsal stream as the auditory spatial information pathway. This pathway appears critical for sound localization. Conversely, the ventral stream is essential for identification of sounds and is the pathway for processing auditory patterns, communications, and speech. Note the similarity to the parallel “what” and “where” pathways that are associated with processing visual stimuli (see Figure 3.9 ; Ungerleider & Haxby, 1994; Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982).

Also similar to a debate in research on visual processing, there is ongoing discussion over whether the auditory where pathway might actually be more correctly referred to as the auditory “how” pathway. Belin and Zatorre (2000) suggested that both streams are necessary for speech perception, with the dorsal pathway critical to understanding the verbal content of the message and the ventral pathway critical for identifying the speaker. They suggested that characterizing the dual streams as the what and how pathways may more accurately reflect their functional segregation.

The ventral stream can be further separated into specialized hemispheric pathways. For example, Zatorre, Belin, et al. (2002) observed that temporal resolution,

**FIGURE 3.9 **Dorsal and ventral pathways. (Drawn by Melody Boyleston.)

As already indicated, the neural mechanisms involved in speech and music perception have received considerable attention. Both have been utilized extensively in explorations of cerebral lateralization and a wide variety of other psychological phenomena. Due to their significant role in contributing to our understanding of auditory processing, we examine the particular cases of speech and music processing and the neural mechanisms associated with each. We begin with a look at speech processing. Some researchers suggested that speech is processed differently from other sounds (Belin et al., 2000).

*Is Speech Special? *

The debate over whether “speech is special,” that is, whether speech is processed in distinctly different ways or utilizes different neural pathways from those of nonspeech sounds, is an ongoing one in psychology and neuroscience. Feature detectors for simple visual stimuli were discovered in the visual cortex of the cat nearly half a century ago (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962). However, despite considerable research, similar identification of neurons for processing auditory features or specific speech stimuli have remained elusive (Syka, Popelar, Kvasnak, & Suta, 1998). Throughout the 1970s, numerous research groups sought to find “call detector” neurons in the auditory cortex of several species (primarily awake monkeys), only to conclude that such pattern recognition must occur through an interconnected group of neurons rather than in feature-specific neurons (Syka et al., 1998).

In contrast, voice-selective areas have been found in regions of the superior temporal sulcus (STS) in humans. These regions are particularly sensitive to the speaker- related characteristics of the human voice (Belin et al., 2000). Belin and colleagues demonstrated that areas on the STS of the right hemisphere were selectively sensitive to speech stimuli. A more in-depth discussion of these issues is provided in Chapter 8 in reference to speech processing. However, for now an important method for examining the neural mechanisms of auditory processing that will be important to understanding the subsequent section on cerebral lateralization and music processing in particular is briefly presented.
### **Auditory Event-Related Potentials **

The auditory ERP, including the auditory brain stem response (ABR) and early ERP components, can reveal important information regarding the function of the auditory processing system. ERPs are averaged electrical responses to discrete stimuli or “events” obtained from a continuous electroencephalographic (EEG) recording from the scalp. Responses to individual signals are generally too small to be distinguished from the background noise of neural events; therefore, the response to a number of discrete signals must be averaged together to observe ERP patterns. Depending on the size of the ERP component studied, signal averaging must typically be done over about 30–60 trials (for large components like P300) to several hundred trials (for small components like the brain stem potentials) (see Luck, 2005). Components or averaged waveforms are generally named according to the direction of their deflection (P for positive deflections and N for negative deflections) and then either their average expected latency or ordinal position (Luck & Girelli, 1998). For example, the first large negative wave deflection occurring about 100 ms poststimulus is referred to interchangeably as either the N1 or N100 component. See Figure 3.10 for a graphical depiction of functional ERP components. Early components, such as the N1, are often referred to as exogenous components since they are thought to reflect sensory processes that are relatively independent of cognitive control (see Coles & Rugg, 1995, for a review). Later components, such as P300 and N400, are thought to reflect cognitive processes and are therefore often referred to as endogenous components. N1 in response to auditory stimuli is modulated by physical aspects of the stimulus, such as intensity (see Coles & Rugg, 1995), but also shows reliable changes as a function of attention, generally being of greater amplitude when listeners attend to the stimuli and ignore competing sources (Hillyard, Hink, Schwent, & Picton, 1973). P300, an endogenous component, is modulated by context, expectancy, and task difficulty (Coles & Rugg, 1995), and the N400 component has been shown to reflect semantic processing (Federmeier, van Petten, Schwartz, & Kutas, 2003; Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). At the same time, these later endogenous components are not immune to the effects of changes in the physical aspects of a stimulus.

Components appearing around 100 ms poststimulus reflect sensory processes and are therefore said to be exogenous components; however, they can also be modulated by attention (Coles & Rugg, 1995; Federmeier et al., 2003; Hillyard et al., 1973; Naatanen, 1992). Later components (beyond 100 ms) generally reflect endogenous cognitive processes (Coles & Rugg, 1995). The P300 component in response to auditory stimuli has received considerable attention and has been used in a number of examinations as an index of mental workload. The P300 has most commonly been used in an oddball paradigm in which two or more stimuli of varying probability are presented. The low-probability target (or oddball) elicits a P300 response that typically decreases in amplitude as the demands of a secondary task increase. The auditory oddball paradigm is discussed in greater detail along with a number of examples of its application in Chapter 6 , “Auditory Tasks in Cognitive Research.” The ABR deserves further attention here as it is commonly used to assess the integrity of auditory structures that lie between the inner ear and the cortex.

**FIGURE 3.10 **ERP components.

*Auditory Brainstem Response *

The ABR occurring during the first few milliseconds after presentation of a stimulus provides an indication of the functioning of the specific relay structures in the pathway from the sensory receptors to the cortex (Buchwald, 1990). Figure 3.10 provides a characterization of a typical ERP graph. The ABR is a common clinical assessment tool. Benefits of ABR testing include the ability to test infants and others with no or diminished verbal capabilities. For example, ABR responses can be used to examine auditory functioning in persons unable to manually or vocally respond. The ABR can also be used to test the validity of claims made by adults that they suffer from partial hearing loss as a result of exposure to high-intensity noise in the workplace.

We now return to our discussion of central auditory processing. Considerable evidence exists for the hemispheric specialization of various auditory processes including both speech and music (Mathiak et al., 2003). A few of these investigations are discussed in the next section before going on to discuss some more general aspects of auditory pattern perception.
### **Cerebral Lateralization **

Cerebral lateralization or hemispheric specialization, particularly for language functions, has been investigated for well over a century, dating at least as far back as the work of Paul Broca and Carl Wernicke in the late 1800s (see Banich, 2004; Tervaniemi & Hugdahl, 2003). The importance of left hemisphere regions for language processing can be traced to Broca’s work nearly a century and a half ago (Grodzinsky & Friederici, 2006; Powell et al., 2006). Left hemisphere language regions, namely, Broca’s area for language production and Wernicke’s area for language reception, were some of the earliest discoveries in brain physiology. Early work in modern cognitive neuroscience resulting from Sperry and Gazzaniga’s (see Gazzaniga, 2000; Gazzaniga & Sperry, 1967) investigations of split brain patients further supported the important role of the left hemisphere for language processing, and production in particular. Sperry and Gazzaniga observed the behavior of patients who had undergone operations in which the two halves of their brains were separated by severing the connections at the corpus callosum and hippocampus, so-called a “split brain” individuals. When visual stimuli were presented to the left visual field (right hemisphere) of split brain individuals, the individuals would be unable to name the objects seen. Conversely, if presented to the right visual field (left hemisphere), the split brain individuals were able to identify and name the objects.

Since the early days of modern cognitive neuroscience, numerous experiments have been carried out examining the role of the left hemisphere in language processing. A dominant left hemispheric pattern of structural asymmetry for speech processing has been extensively documented (Just, Carpenter, Keller, Eddy, et al., 1996; Kasai et al., 2001; Pardo, Makela, & Sams, 1999; Tervaniemi & Hugdahl, 2003). Left hemisphere specialization for language has been observed using behavioral techniques (see, e.g., Hartley, Speer, Jonides, Reuter-Lorenz, & Smith, 2001), electrophysiological indices such as the EEG (Davidson, Chapman, Chapman, & Henriques, 1990), and brain imaging studies, such as PET scans and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; Drager et al., 2004; Peelle, McMillan, Moore, Grossman, & Wingfield, 2004; Posner, Petersen, Fox, & Raichle, 1988; Zatorre, Evans, Meyer, & Gjedde, 1992). Even nonauditory forms of language, such as American Sign Language, demonstrate greater activation of left hemisphere processing in individuals with congenital deafness (Bavelier et al., 1998). However, modern researchers pointed out that language processing is not solely a left hemisphere task. A number of important processes are carried out predominantly by the right hemisphere. For example, understanding prosodic cues relies more heavily on right hemispheric mechanisms than left (Friederici & Alter, 2004), and some syntactic processes have been found to activate right hemispheric regions (Grodzinsky & Friederici, 2006). In addition, there appear to be gender differences in cerebral asymmetry patterns for both speech and music.

A number of recent investigations have indicated that hemispheric asymmetry is stronger in males than females. This appears to be the case for both language processing (Nowicka & Fersten, 2001; Pujol et al., 2002) and music processing. For example, Pujol and colleagues (2002) found significantly more white matter content in left hemispheric regions relative to the right in areas associated with language processing in both males and females. But, males have significantly more left hemisphere white matter in these areas than females. Greater cerebral asymmetry among males relative to females is also found during music processing.
#### **MUSIC PROCESSING **

Humans possess an implicit ability to process both speech and music. In the case of speech, the supporting evidence comes from studies showing that neonates and infants are able to make phonetic discrimination, as measured by electrophysiological responses (Dehaene-Lambertz & Baillet, 1998; Dehaene-Lambertz & Pena, 2001). That music abilities are also implicit is supported by the observation that neonates detect changes in tonal patterns (Dehaene-Lambertz, 2000), and that adults with no formal musical training demonstrate both early (200 ms) and late (500 ms) ERP responses to unexpected changes in tonal patterns (Koelsch, Gunter, Friederici, & Schroeger, 2000). Koelsch and colleagues referred to these early ERP component patterns in response to unexpected sound patterns as ERAN (early right anterior negativity) responses. They suggested that the ERAN reflects a preattentive musical sound expectancy violation based on implicit knowledge of complex musical patterns (Koelsch et al., 2003). The neurophysiological exploration of musical processing is an area of growing interest, and a recent surge of investigations is beginning to shed light on how the human brain processes music. The perception of music is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 , “Nonverbal Sounds and Workload.” Here, a brief discussion is presented of sex differences in speech and music.
### **Sex Differences in Speech and Music **

Differences between the sexes have been observed for the cortical areas utilized when processing both speech and music (Koelsch et al., 2003). Illustrative of sex differences in language processing, Jaeger and colleagues (1998) used PET scans to measure cerebral blood flow (CBF) while men and women performed a task involving reading verbs and generating past-tense forms. Males and females had equivalent levels of accuracy and response time on the task but demonstrated different patterns of cortical activity. Males demonstrated left lateralized cortical activation patterns, while females demonstrated bilateral activation specific to the perisylvian region. A similar difference in lateralization is present for music processing.

Koelsch and his colleagues (2003) conducted what may be the first systematic examination of sex differences in music processing. They had participants listen to sequences of five chords while recording EEG and ERPs. In some of the chord sequences, an unexpected and harmonically inappropriate chord was presented at either the third or fifth position. The inappropriate harmonies elicited an ERAN response, reaching a peak amplitude around 200 ms following the presentation of the chord. Particularly germane to the current purpose was their observation that this ERAN pattern was different for males and females. Males demonstrated a strongly right-lateralized ERAN, while females exhibited a bilateral response. Note that for males this pattern is in direct opposition to the predominantly left-lateralized response to language processing, while females demonstrated bilateral activation for both speech and music tasks.
#### **ESSENTIAL AUDITORY PROCESSES **

A number of auditory processes can be considered essential even though they may be entirely unconscious. For example, as will be discussed, auditory stream segregation and auditory scene analysis help us understand the world around us in important ways; yet, most people never think about them. We begin with a discussion of one more recognized essential auditory process: sound localization.
### **Sound Localization **

Humans and other animal species rely on sound localization for survival. It is essential that we be able not only to detect the presence of but also to localize the sounds of oncoming vehicles, falling objects, and so on, as well as find objects such as a ringing telephone or a distraught child. Since we have ears on both sides of our head, we can use a number of cues, such as the difference in arrival time at each of the ears (interaural time difference, ITD) and the difference in sound level at each ear (interaural intensity difference, IID) to aid in sound localization. ITD is best for sounds with low-frequency spectra, and the IID is utilized more effectively for high- frequency spectra.

Several neural areas are involved in sound localization. Neurons in the superior olivary nucleus respond maximally when a sound reaches one ear before the other, thus aiding in detection of ITD. ITD and IID appear to be carried out primarily in the primary auditory cortex as damage to this area significantly impairs these abilities (Banich, 2004; Middlebrooks, Furukawa, Stecker, & Mickey, 2005). Sound localization appears to utilize different neural pathways for approaching an object versus avoiding an object (Dean, Redgrave, Sahibzada, & Tsuji, 1986).

An area in the midbrain, called the superior colliculus (SC), aids in sound localization (Withington, 1999) and responds to light and touch. The SC assists in directing visual attention and guiding eye movements (Middlebrooks et al., 2005; Populin, Tollin, & Yin, 2004). The multimodal nature of the SC allows integration of alerts from multiple sensory channels. Other multimodal mechanisms facilitate our development of auditory spatial representations.
### **Auditory Space Perception **

*Auditory space perception *refers to the ability to develop a spatial representation of the world (or the area one is experiencing) based on auditory information. Auditory information directs attention to distinct areas and objects. It helps us locate sound sources and avoid obstacles.

Although we may not consciously think about it, we can understand a considerable amount of information about the space around us solely though sound. For example, with eyes closed or in a completely dark room, most people can generally tell how big a room is, what type of materials are on the walls and floor, whether there are high or low ceilings, if there are many objects in the room, and so on. Sounds reverberate off walls and ceilings and provide the listener with a considerable amount of information. And, even if the information is not in conscious awareness, it can have an impact on mood and feelings of safety or security. Blesser and Salter (2007) referred to this as the aural architecture of the space. As they pointed out, the aural architecture of a space is a composite of the many surfaces, structures, and materials the space contains. We can tell by sound alone whether a space is crowded with objects or vacant. Perhaps you have had the experience of noticing how different a familiar room sounds after removing all of your furniture and personal items. Removing the contents of a room changes its aural architecture. Most of the time, auditory spatial information is integrated with visual spatial information. A number of similarities and some striking differences are observed between spatial perception in these two modalities. This topic is discussed further in Chapter 9 .

The next stage of auditory pattern perception relies heavily on top-down processing mechanisms involving the integration of environmental context with the personal rich history of auditory experience, thus allowing us to make sense of the auditory scene. Acoustic signals must be analyzed into their respective sources as well as synthesized and reconstructed into meaningful units before an understanding of their informational content can be achieved. We turn now to an examination of the many processes that help us accomplish this no-less-than-astonishing feat.
### **Auditory Scene Analysis **

*Auditory scene analysis *refers to the process of interpreting the auditory soundscape. It involves sorting out how many different sources of sound there are and which sounds go with what object or person. As discussed in this chapter, auditory perception stems from sound waves entering the ear and being channeled through the ear canal to the tympanic membrane. All of the various sound waves present in the environment must be processed through the same peripheral structures. Auditory scene analysis deals with the topic of how these various sounds are sorted out and interpreted. First, how are the various different sounds separated?
#### **Auditory Stream Segregation **

The everyday auditory scene is comprised of multiple competing acoustical stimuli generated from a variety of sources. Fortunately, humans possess a number of organizational processes that assist us in extracting useful information from these competing acoustical signals (Plomp, 2002). Two key organizational processes are auditory stream segregation and the continuity effect.

The everyday acoustic environment is filled with a host of sounds. To make sense of this auditory scene, the sounds must be separated into their respective sources. Some general principles of auditory stream segregation have been identified. The auditory system tends to group sounds that are similar rather than sounds that follow each other closely in time (Bregman, 1990; Plomp, 2002). These groupings or links are used to identify which sounds are being generated by the same source. This is the very essence of the process known as auditory stream segregation.

Stream segregation can be demonstrated in the lab by playing a series of high and low tones in quick succession. Within certain temporal restrictions, listeners will “hear” two streams, one made of the high tones and one made of the low tones, as if the two streams are being emitted from two different sources (Bregman & Campbell, 1971). When the tones are played very slowly, they are heard as one continuous sequence; however, as the presentation rate increases, listeners begin to hear two separate streams. The phenomenon is particularly strong when notes are played 100 ms or less apart (Bregman, 1990; Bregman & Campbell, 1971). Bregman further noted that the greater the frequency separation between the notes the more compelling the segregation is.

Auditory stream segregation is a fundamental component of auditory scene analysis. Organizing information into coherent streams helps us process and retain the auditory objects and events in our environment. Bregman and Campbell’s (1971) experiment demonstrated that organizing material into coherent streams not only is automatic but also aids in retention. Participants were presented a series of high notes (i.e., A, B, C) interspersed with a series of low notes (i.e., 1, 2, 3) in series, such as A12BC3. But when asked to recall the notes, they reported them as grouped by their perceived “stream” (i.e., ABC, 123). This grouping of the incoming sound information into auditory objects or wholes appears to occur automatically. In fact, Bregman (1990) argued that it is largely preattentive, and in fact that it takes additional effort to hear specific individual items outside their organized streams. This position remains controversial, with some arguing that it requires attention.

*Attention and Auditory Stream Segregation *

A recent surge of investigations has led to a debate over whether auditory stream segregation (separating sounds into their logical sources) requires attention. Little emphasis was placed on the role of attention during the early investigations of auditory streaming. However, several investigations have examined this issue (Carlyon, Cusack, Foxton, & Robertson, 2001; Macken, Tremblay, Houghton, Nicholls, & Jones, 2003). By examining apparent stream segregation with irrelevant sound effect (ISE) paradigms, Macken and colleagues presented compelling evidence that auditory stream segregation occurs outside focal attention.

By definition, the ISE paradigm investigates the disrupting effects of irrelevant auditory material on the serial recall performance of a concurrent task. Jones (1999) reviewed evidence of the situations and circumstances in which irrelevant sounds were detrimental to recall in a concurrent task. Macken and colleagues (2003) summarized this research and interpreted it in terms of the role of attention in auditory stream segregation, pointing out that segregation occurs outside the realm of focal attention.

However, despite the strong case made by Macken and colleagues (Jones, 1999; Macken et al., 2003) that focal attention is not required for auditory stream segregation to exist, it can still be argued that stream segregation, while clearly an obligatory process, nevertheless may still require mental resources. A case can be made for this interpretation by examining the situations in which ISE effects occur. Macken et al. (2003) pointed out that serial recall performance for an attended task is significantly disrupted when irrelevant babble speech (concurrent presentation of two or more voices) is presented from a single location. However, this disruption decreases as the number of simultaneous voices increases. Macken interpreted this as evidence that a cumulative masking effect results, which prevents segregation. When the simultaneous voices (up to six) are presented from separable locations, then the level of disruption is higher than when all voices are presented from a single location. This could be interpreted as evidence that when possible obligatory stream separation occurs even in channels outside focal attention this process requires some degree of mental resources and thus interferes with a concurrent task.

*Continuity Effect *

The continuity effect is another of the essential processes for organizing acoustical patterns. The continuity effect refers to our ability to perceive a continuous and coherent stream of auditory information in the face of disruption from simultaneously overlapping acoustical information. Our higher auditory processing mechanisms literally “reinstate” or reconstruct missing acoustical information. We accomplish this task by using the context of the signal to make predictions regarding the most likely acoustical stimulus to have been presented (Plomp, 2002). Miller and Licklider (1950) were among the first to document this remarkable process. More recently, numerous investigations have illustrated a special case of the continuity effect used to facilitate speech perception. This special case is called phonemic restoration, and it was illustrated in a now-classic experiment conducted by Warren and Warren (1970).

Warren and Warren (1970) demonstrated that when a phoneme within a sentence was replaced by a click or cough, listeners would “fill in” the missing phoneme, thus preserving the continuity of the sentence. Generally, listeners would not even be aware that the phoneme had not actually been presented. This process of phonemic restoration has been observed in several subsequent investigations (Samuel, 1996a, 1996b).

The continuity effect and the special case of phonemic restoration provide compelling evidence for the importance of context in auditory processing. The use of context relies on top-down cognitive processes. Additional organizational processes assist in auditory pattern recognition. As with all sensory experiences, there is a limit to how many sounds the human can process at any given time. Therefore, the gestalt principle of figure ground organization in which some sounds receive focal attention while others “fade” into the background can also be demonstrated during auditory processing. Further issues relevant to auditory stream segregation are discussed in Chapter 7 under the topic of auditory perceptual organization, which has particular relevance to the processing of nonverbal sounds. The role of attention and other information-processing topics are discussed in the next chapter, auditory cognition. But first, a summary of the physical characteristics of the acoustic stimulus and the mechanisms of the auditory processing system just discussed is provided.
## **SUMMARY **

Auditory processing requires the interaction of hearing (a sensory process) and interpretation of the acoustic signal (a perceptual-cognitive process). The sensory process can be thought of as largely a bottom-up, data-driven process, while the interpretation can be said to be a top-down process. It is the interaction of these two processes that results in auditory cognition. The temporal pattern of a sound (the relationship of sound to silence across time) also provides an important source of information in the bottom-up sensory signal. Each of these physical characteristics and the location of the sound and other cues assist in the process of auditory stream segregation.

Together, these characteristics provide the soundscape open for interpretation, as discussed in the next chapter.
## **CONCLUDING REMARKS **

The concepts presented in this chapter will reoccur through the remaining text. For example, we will discuss aspects of auditory scene analysis in greater detail, noting in Chapter 9 how information from the auditory channel is combined with information from other modalities. Chapter 11 discusses the importance of understanding how we perceive frequency and amplitude and the phenomenon of auditory masking in relation to the design of auditory displays and alarms. We also address in subsequent chapters the mental workload required by these intelligent processes. First, in the next chapter we address many of the key issues as well as methods and techniques for assessing mental workload.

* This unique characteristic of the auditory system has important implications. For example, sound stimuli from both ears can still be processed if damage occurs to the primary auditory cortex in one hemisphere.